Introduction and Overview The Concepts of Interdependence as Developed in Thibaut and Kelley (1959), 5 An Illustrative Analysis of the Relationship, 7 The Status of the Matrix in Our Earlier Work, 13 A Theory of the Effective Matrix, 14 The Given Matrix and the Effective Matrix, 16 The Transformation Process, 17 The Functions of the Transformation Process, 20 The Logical Analysis, 23 Abstracts of Chapters, 25 Rafe ts gah Sard Weel! se scomwligrcny plevggyi] > nhicton er a oo. See ol! oo showin ds ii eS juts @ ape 1 I}? ra The interdependence matrix for a dyad describes the way in which the two persons control each other’s outcomes in the course of their interaction. It is constituted by specifying the behaviors important to the relationship that each of them may enact and by assessing the consequences for both persons of all possible combinations of their respective behaviors. Thus each cell in the matrix defines a possible interpersonal event. The flow of their relationship can be described in terms of the sequence of particular cells through which it moves. The interdependence matrix plays a pivotal role in the analysis and understanding of the dyad. On the one hand, it reflects the various ways in which psychological and situational factors impinge on the pair. The pattern of interdependence summarizes the consequences for the pair of the abilities, needs, and evaluative criteria each person brings to the dyad as well as the manner in which these two sets of personal dispositions engage with each other. The pattern is similarly indicative of the external resources at their disposal and of the task and environmental constraints within which they operate. On the other hand, the interdependence matrix describes the joint and individual problems the two persons face in their relationship and certain of the means available to them for solving these problems. Thus the matrix portrays the kinds and degrees of power they have over each other by means of outcome control and the bases they have for influence through threats, appeals to social norms, and other communications. These aspects of the pattern have implications for whatever interaction process, norms, and roles will develop if the two persons achieve a stable and satisfactory relationship or, if they fail to do so, the nature of the conflict that will characterize its dissolution. In short, the interdependence matrix is an exceedingly useful conceptual device for moving from the psychological and situational bases of interpersonal relations fo the processes and structures characteristic of successful relationships and the conflict and disruption in the unsuccessful. The nature of the interdependent relationship is not always fully or accurately understood by the participants. Furthermore, even when it is fully and accurately assessed, the outcome matrix does not always indicate unequivocally the course of action to be taken. However, although we must keep these caveats in mind, this simple and obvious pointis to be emphasized: If a person knows (or thinks he knows) the contingent relations between his own and his partner’s actions, on the one hand, and his own outcomes, on the other, he has a basis for deciding what to do himself and/or what to attempt to induce the partner to do in order to affect his own outcomes beneficially. The outcome matrix determines the experiences that the interdependent persons will have in the course of their interaction. Depending on the actions they take, whatever the reasons for them, the outcome matrix specifies what the consequences will be for each of them. Consequently the outcome matrix affects what they might learn from their interaction. The possible ‘learnings’ are quite varied, including, for example, specific individual actions, joint and coordinated action, preaction communication, and understandings of the contingencies themselves. Thus a given outcome matrix affords the basis for learning to perform, automatically and without thought, a certain action in a specific situation. For recurrent interdependence situations people acquire social habits that enable them to act without analysis and decision. A set of different outcome matrices, representing different contingencies, affords the basis for discrimination learning—learning to vary one’s behavior in ways appropriate to different social settings. Also, singly and together, the outcome matrices provide the basis for cognitive learning—for developing an understanding of the types of pattern and the logical relations among them and an insight into the problems they pose for the relationship. It must be emphasized, though, that when two persons are placed ina given interdependence relationship (as in an experiment) their respective actions and their interaction may not be predictable from the properties of that relationship. One or both may misunderstand their interdependence and therefore make inappropriate decisions and one or both may respond with an inappropriate habit. (The children’s game “Simon Says” would be an example of the latter). In the long run, if the inappropriate decision or habit is not deadly, we would expect it to be replaced by one more appropriate. Thus we expect behaviour to be moderately appropriate to the interdependence problem of the moment. The learning tasks here however, are exceedingly complex and difficult, the discriminations to be made are subtle and manifold, and the concepts to be formed are complicated and closely interrelated. Mistakes are to be expected, particularly for the inexperienced and for those whose experience has been restricted to special settings. It is our working assumption, then, that the total set of outcome matrices—those correctly and those incorrectly understood—account for all of social behavior. They account for everything that is or can be learned about social interdependence. Thus in their total effect they are responsible for both the successes and the failures in social interaction—the successes when a specific matrix is recognized for what it really is and is responded to in its own terms and the failures when a matrix is defined and responded to incorrectly. The opposite side of the coin is that any specific matrix bears only an imperfect relation to the behavior associated with it. As already described, the behavior occurring in relation to any particular matrix may have little to do with the particular contingencies represented there. In short, when considered as the total set, outcome matrices provide a complete account of social behavior. No single one of them, however, is the sole determinant of action within it. This book is an analysis of outcome matrices (interdependence matrices). It considers their possible patterns, their antecedents, the problems they pose in relation to their properties, how they can be thought about and provide bases for decisions, and what they make it possible to learn about social life. THE CONCEPTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE AS DEVELOPED IN THIBAUT AND KELLEY (1959) To provide a background for our present formulation of a theory of interdependence it seems useful to begin with an outline of the principal concepts that were used in our earlier treatment of the topic (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959) and that serve as the starting point for our present work. To give substance to the meaning and utility of these concepts we choose to begin with a story of courtship and marriage which we subsequently analyze by reference to the concepts presented in the 1959 book. The story is that of Marya and Sergey in Tolstoy’s short novel Family Happiness (Tolstoy, 1940). We sketch the main episodes in their relationship. The story is related by Marya, who is 17 when she falls in love with Sergey, a bachelor in his late thirties who lives on a neighboring estate in the country some distance from St. Petersburg. Sergey has loved Marya for a long time and is overwhelmed with joy that she has come to love him. They are married and there is perfect family happiness. Marya describes her feelings: The mere sight of him made everything begin to speak and press for admittance to my heart, filling it with happiness. .. Now I could see what he meant by saying that to live for others was the only true happiness, and I agreed with him perfectly. I believed that our life together would be endlessly happy and untroubled. I looked forward, not to foreign tours or fashionable society or display, but to a quite different scene—a quiet family life in the country, with constant recognition in all things of the hand of Providence. . his plans for our future life together were just my plans, only more clearly and better expressed in his words. Blissful months passed and winter came. There were changes that gradually slipped into Marya’s feelings. . in spite of his company, I began to feel lonely, that life was repeating itself, that there was nothing new either in him or in myself, and that we were merely going back to what had been before. A new and disquieting sensation began to creep into my heart. To love him was not enough for me after the happiness I had felt in falling in love. I wanted movement and not a calm course of existence. ... I felt in myself a superabundance of energy which found no outlet in our quiet life. In spite of strong efforts to conceal her feelings Marya’s discontent and the basis for it are plainly evident to Sergey. He talks with her about her unhappiness and finally proposes that they spend three months—from Christmas to Easter—in St. Petersburg to attend the theater and ballet and to introduce Marya into society. Sergey has misgivings about this venture and hopes that Marya will reject it. She has had no experience with the city or with society and the idea resonates with her growing need for excitement. They arrive in the city just before Christmas. From the start nothing has ever been so wonderful for Marya. I found myself at once in such a new and delightful world, surrounded by so many pleasures and confronted by such novel interests, that I instantly, though unconsciously, turned my back on past life and its plans. ‘All that was preparatory, a mere playing at life; but here is the real thing! And there is the future too!” Such were my thoughts. The restlessness and symptoms of depression which had troubled me at home vanished at once and entirely, as if by magic. My love for my husband grew calmer. | could not doubt his love; every thought of mine was understood at once, every feeling shared. lalso began to realize that he not only loved me but was proud of me. And Sergey was proud of her, at least for awhile. Months pass, Easter has gone by and Marya has given herself over to society and to her commitments there, totally enchanted by this glittering life. Sergey observes all of this from the wings; he has gone from boredom to irritation and finally to intermittent jealousy and anger. Marya does not return to the country and, apart from visits to supervise his estate, Sergey remains with her in the city. He holds steadfast in his love for her and in his committed support for all her activities; but he figures only peripherally in her life. Marya: . | was constantly in society where I did not need him. . My whole day, from late in the morning till late at night, was taken up by the claims of society; even if I stayed at home, my time was not my own. This no longer seemed to me either gay or dull, but it seemed that so, and not otherwise, it always had to be. Three years pass in this way, mechanically. Neither Marya nor Sergey makes any serious move to change their relationship. A son is born and Marya loves him, though it is Sergey who spends time with him. Still, nothing seems to be altered. A summer is spent at Baden, where a goodly sample of fashionable people from the capitals of Europe are foregathered. Here occurs a series of events that causes Marya to feel the futility and emptiness of her life. In this international setting she is outshone and humiliated and she is revolted by the competition for social’ leadership. Moreover, when she is aggressively courted by an Italian marquis, toward whom she is both primitively attracted and repelled, she becomes frightened by her own feelings and by the thought that she had come so dangerously near to casting her husband and child out of her life. She is overwhelmed with self-disgust. The near-loss of Sergey and her son makes her want to see them very much. Marya and Sergey return to the country. A second son is born. Nothing much happens, but Marya is ready for a surcease from excitement. The novel ends with a touching scene between Sergey and Marya who is fondling the infant son. That day ended the romance of our marriage; the old feeling became a precious irrecoverable remembrance, but a new feeling of love for my children and the father of my children laid the foundation of a new life anda quite different happiness; and that life and happiness have lasted to the present time. An Illustrative Analysis of the Relationship We now introduce the main concepts of the Thibaut—Kelley framework through their application to the story of Marya and Sergey as they move through the vicissitudes of their relationship. Outcomes. The outcomes for any participant in an ongoing interaction can be stated in terms of the rewards received and the costs incurred by the participant, where these values depend on the behaviors produced by the two persons. For some purposes rewards and costs are treated separately, but typically we have assumed that they can be combined into a single scale of ‘“goodness”’ of outcome. By rewards we refer to whatever gives pleasure and gratification to the person. Costs refer to factors that inhibit or deter the performance of any behavior or segment of behavior—factors such as physical or mental effort or pain, embarrassment or anxiety, and the arousal of conflicting forces or competing response tendencies of any sort. The magnitudes of the rewards and costs experienced by the dyadic members will depend on their needs and values, their skills and abilities in performing the behaviors, and the congruency of the behaviors or behavioral products with their needs and values. Satiation reduces rewards and fatigue increases costs. In the story of Marya and Sergey the rewards in the early phases of their marriage were based on their need and ability to give love and affection and to receive it. Each found happiness in “living for’ the other and happiness in being “‘lived for.’” Moreover, their beliefs about the good life and their projects for the future of their lives together were mutually supportive—“his plans . . were just my plans.” For Marya, however, some of these rewards gradually lessened because there was nothing new. Later, in the city, Marya’s rewards came not so much from Sergey as from the excitement of being a beautiful woman in an admiring society, but at the end (though it is only briefly sketched) it was again Sergey who became the source of her deepest and best rewards. At the beginning of their marriage costs were few. They came from the brief periods of separation when Sergey was occupied with the business of the estate—interludes when the demands of the estate competed with their desire to be together. Later, in St. Petersburg, Marya’s involvement in society imposed heavy costs on Sergey who would rather have returned to their life in the country but felt obliged to endure a place and a role that he disliked. Still later, during the summer in Baden, it was Marya—humilated, anxious, and frightened—who experienced the heavy costs. Evaluation of Outcomes. In evaluating the adequacy of their relationship, the members of a dyad need some kind of standard for gauging the acceptability of the outcomes they receive from it. Two kinds of standard for making such an evaluation have been identified—the comparison level (CL) and the comparison level for alternatives (CL,),). The CL is the standard against which the participant evaluates the “attractiveness” of the relationship or how satisfactory it is. This is the standard that reflects the quality of outcomes that the participant feels he or she deserves. Outcomes falling above CL are experienced as relatively satisfying and those below CL are unsatisfactory. The location of CL on the person’s scale of outcomes is determined by all the outcomes known to the member, either by direct experience or by observation of others. The more attainable an outcome, the heavier it will be weighted in forming the Chi The CL,;, can be defined informally as the lowest level of outcomes a member will accept in the light of available alternative opportunities in other relationships. So defined, it follows that if outcomes drop below CL, the participant will leave the relationship. The location of CL,), depends mainly on the quality of the most attractive of the alternative relationships readily available to the participant. As outcomes in a relationship exceed CL,,, by larger and larger degrees the participant becomes progressively more dependent on the relationship as the unique source of his experiences. [For a fuller discussion of CL and CL,;, see Thibaut and Kelley (1959), Chapters 6 (especially), 7, 10, and 12. ] The effects of CL on outcome evaluation were particularly striking for Marya. The intense and novel joys of courtship, falling in love, and the honeymoon weeks established a high CL that the ensuing routines of a country household could not equal. ‘To love him was not enough for me after the happiness I had felt in falling inlove.’’ The dissatisfactions that she then revealed to Sergey led him to arrange their sojourn in the city, where a new range of experience for Marya seemed all the more marvelous against the standard of her provincial background. The sheer excitement she felt about her life in society gradually subsided partly (it may be imagined) because satiation set in and partly because her CL rose as it incorporated her recent experiences. “This no longer seerned to me either gay or dull.” As far as we know from Tolstoy neither Marya nor Sergey made any serious effort to break off their relationship. They lived together even through the three years in St. Petersburg, although Marya’s dependence on Sergey was sharply reduced: “I was constantly in society where I did not need him.’”” We may guess that, in some degree at least, Marya remained with Sergey because of the high costs of exit (disapproval from kinfolk, friends, church, and the wider society, feelings of guilt about broken obligations, and the hurt to Sergey). These exit costs would serve to depress CL,,. Attractive alternative relationships were certainly available to her. But perhaps it was the totality of them and her life with all of that, rather than any other single person, that was attractive to her. When, in Baden, one particular alternative relationship with the Italian marquis was made obtrusively available, she balked and fled—back to her husband and child. It was as though, when her commitment was tested and the irreversible decision was faced, she understood or remembered how much her future happiness depended on them. Matrix concepts. The device we have used to represent the various patterns of interdependence in relationships is the outcome matrix. In the simple form in which it is illustrated here the matrix has two columns and two rows. (See Figure 1.1.) The two columns distinguish two mutually exclusive behaviors or behavioral segments (@, and a.) that person A can enact and the two rows distinguish two behaviors (b, and b,) that B can enact. Each of the four cells then represents the intersection or joint occurrence of one of A’s behaviors and one of B’s behaviors. In each of the four cells the number placed above the diagonal indicates the outcome that A receives, whereas the number below the diagonal indicates B’s outcome. Thus, in the relationship summarized in Figure 1.1, if personA enacts a, while B is enacting b,, A receives an outcome of 0 and B an outcome of 2. Person A Person B ae ee Figure 1.1 [llustration of the 2x2 matrix. The degree to which outcomes exceed CL,,, determines how greatly the person depends on the dyad for favorable outcomes. Accordingly, the numbers entered in the outcome matrix are usually scaled from CL,), as the zero point. The entries in the matrix indicate the degree to which each person is dependent on the dyad, and the pattern of entries thus represents their pattern of interdependence. Each member’s dependence constitutes the basis for the other member’s power. Thus A’s power over B is defined as the range of outcomes through which A can move B, this range being the distance between B’s CL,,, and the best outcomes A can produce for him. There are two broad kinds of power. The first we have called fate control (FC). If, by varying his or her behavior, person A can affect B’s outcomes regardless of what B does, A has fate control over B. If each has this kind of power, the pattern is one of mutual fate control (MFC). To illustrate this pattern of MFC from the story of Marya and Sergey consider the earliest phase of their marriage. Each wanted above all to give love and consideration to the other; each willingly gave and each happily received “constant mutual love.’”” Figure 1.2 represents this mutually benevolent relationship. When both “give much,” both receive their best outcomes and their outcomes are always higher than if the other chose to “give little.’ Thus the choice of each affects the other’s happiness. (Each also derives pleasure from “giving much” to the other; as we show later, this matrix also involves bilateral reflexive control.) The possibility of giving little, which would yield low outcomes to both, no doubt has such low salience that it would scarcely be considered. Marya Gives Gives much little Gives much Sergey Gives little Figure 1.2 Illustration of mutually benevolent relationship with fate control. A second kind of power is called behavior control (BC). If, by varying his or her behavior, A can make it desirable for B to vary his or her behavior also, then A has behavior control over B. If each has this kind of power, the pattern is one of mutual behavior control (MBC). The behavior of each is conditional on that of the other and coordination of behavior becomes important. In Tolstoy’s story Marya speaks of her happiness at the beginning of the marriage that ‘his plans . . were just my plans.” The agreement on a plan was in itself gratifying. Suppose that two plans had been discussed. Sergey’s announcement that he liked plan X would have brought Marya to instant accord. She would even have been happy to agree on plan Y and so would Sergey, but neither would have espoused either plan if the other had espoused a different plan. Figure 1.3 shows this pattern of mutual behavior control. The patterns of interdependence shown in Figures 1.2 and 1.3 reflect the harmony of the early stages of the relationship between Marya and Sergey. Their outcomes are correspondent: they are positively correlated Figure 1.3 Illustration of mutual behavior control. over the cells of the matrix. What is good for one is good for the other and what is bad is bad for both. They share a common fate. As the story unfolds conflicts began to develop between Marya and Sergey. In the city Marya’s commitments to society involved her so exclusively that little was left to give Sergey, who nonetheless “holds steadfast.” The pattern of MFC represented in Figure 1.2 then becomes that of Figure 1.4, as Marya’s interests shift away from preoccupation with Sergey. Marya’s commitments led her to prefer to give little to Sergey, from whom she continued to receive support for all her activities. Conceivably, Sergey could have threatened also to “give little,’” but as one can see from Figure 1.4 this action would have been quite painful to carry out. The pattern in Figure 1.4 is no longer harmonious: a strong element of outcome noncorrespondence has entered. Marya Gives Gives much little Gives much Sergey Gives little Figure 1.4 Illustration of noncorrespondent relationship with mutual fate control. Noncorrespondence can also occur, of course, in patterns of mutual behavior control. Suppose that Marya’s alienation from Sergey had developed much further. She preferred life in society and he, life in the country. But whatever Sergey did he would have strongly preferred to share with Marya, whereas she would much rather have lived without him. As in Figure 1.5 his best outcome would have occurred if they had lived together in the country and hers would have occurred in society unaccompanied by him. The outcomes of each would have been highly contingent on the other’s behavior and noncorrespondently so. [For a more extended discussion of these concepts see Thibaut and Kelley (1959), Chapters 3, 4, 7 (especially), 9, and 10. ] Marya Life in Life in society the country Life in society Sergey Life in the country Figure 1.5 Illustration of noncorrespondent relationship with mutual behavior control. The Status of the Matrix in Our Earlier Work The view presented in our earlier book took the matrix as being useful in two different ways. For some purposes we assumed that the matrix describes the subjective understandings and anticipations of the possible interactions and outcomes, however inadequately they may represent the actual universe of possibilities. Thus employed, the matrix describes the individual orientations of the participants. For other purposes, and more generally, the matrix was intended to be used in the objective sense that the values in the cells reflect the actually experienced outcomes when the joint behaviors are engaged in. This use of the matrix thus represents the joint interests of the dyad as a unit. In its subjective form the matrix was Said to afford opportunities to make short-run predictions about what behaviors will be performed and whether exploration of the matrix will continue. When the matrix represents the objectively available outcomes (the experiences potentially attainable in the relationship), it could be used to make long-term predictions about the viability of the dyad and, under certain conditions, the behaviors most likely to occur. In its objective form the matrix was intended to have two other closely related uses. It may serve as a bench mark against which to evaluate the degree to which, at any stage in its development, the dyad is realizing the outcomes potentially available, and it may be used prescriptively to make recommendations about the joint behaviors that ought to be performed in the interests of the relationship. Thus we were aspiring to use the matrix for predicting behavior in the dyad. The subjective matrix was thought to be useful in making short-run predictions about exploratory behavior in the early formative stages of the relationship. The objective matrix was suggested to provide the basis for long-run predictions about patterns of behavior and likelihood of viability of the relationship. Taken together, the two forms of the matrix would then constitute the effective matrix from which behavior in the dyad could be predicted. A THEORY OF THE EFFECTIVE MATRIX In revising and extending the analysis made in 1959, several avenues of development are open. In an effort to improve the prediction of behavior in interdependent relationships one might be tempted to adopt a psychometric approach. The alternative courses of action persons perceive as available to themselves and to others could be determined and the anticipated consequences of various joint enactments could be measured on preference or utility scales. These assessments and measurements would be used to predict the first response after measurement that each person makes to the situation and, possibly, the first steps of their interaction. This psychometric approach is part of the strategy adopted by Wyer (1969). Immediately before interacting pairs of unacquainted subjects were asked to fill out a questionnaire that assessed each subject’s preference (or utilities) for various combinations of outcomes for himself and his partner. The dyads then proceeded to interact for 50 trials in one of 12 different matrices. The preference judgments taken from the questionnaire responses were used to transform the raw matrix values given to each pair of subjects. These transformed values generated predictions of dyadic behavior that were, in general, quite good and (at least somewhat) superior to those that could be made with the raw matrix values. Rather than adopting the psychometric approach, we present here a theory about the antecedents of the outcome matrix that is effective at the time the behavior occurs—the matrix that is the most immediate determinant of the behavior. To the degree that the theory is correct, comprehensive, and operationalizable, it becomes possible to predict the effective matrix from facts about the participants and their situation. The dyadic behavior itself can then be predicted from knowledge of the effective matrix. A valid theory of the antecedents of the effective matrix avoids the inefficiencies inherent in the psychometric approach, which stem from the necessity of making ad hoc assessments of each situation and each sample of subjects before predicting the behavioral consequences. Such a theory probably also provides a better basis for predicting the longer course or flow of the interaction between interdependent persons. It is likely to imply how the matrix will change as a function of the events of the interaction. At the very least it specifies processes and factors entering into the matrix that are subject to influence and alteration by the interaction itself. The problems involved in identifying the antecedents of the effective matrix are essentially social-psychological in nature and have to do with analyzing the products of social learning—the acquisition of social values and the development of beliefs about social structures and causes of social behavior. Although some of these phenomena have been studied outside social psychology (especially in developmental psychology), their systematic delineation and analysis would seem to be the responsibility of social psychology and not likely to present themselves as problems to other areas of psychology. There were two main considerations that convinced us of the importance of confronting these problems of the origins of the effective matrix. One major impetus to our decision came from our dissatisfaction with simplistic experimentation in which the matrix defined by the experimenter was naively assumed to be the effective one. Not only is this assumption erroneous on the basis of everyday observation of individual and cultural differences in what constitutes an incentive but there is much research evidence for its invalidity. The work of McClintock and Messick and their colleagues (e.g., McClintock and McNeel, 1967; Messick and Thorngate, 1967) demonstrates that behavioral choices in response to given matrix values are highly variable across subjects and indeed may be interpreted as measures of the strength of differing social motives. Contextual influences, for example, the subject’s comparison level created by the prior level of his outcomes, have also been shown to affect the subject’s response to given matrix values (Friedland, Arnold, and Thibaut, 1974). Raw matrix values are simply not satisfactory predictors of behavior. The second consideration that impelled us to work toward a theory of the effective matrix was our concern that the potentialities of outcome matrices have been underestimated and widely misunderstood. The writings of social psychologists abound in references to the narrowly hedonistic assumptions inherent in the use of interdependence matrices and in assertions that such prosocial motives as altruism, cooperation, and the desire for justice are precluded from and inconsistent with an analysis based on these matrices. Our disagreement with the foregoing position is expressed in our theory of the effective matrix. The Given Matrix and the Effective Matrix The effective matrix, as we now construe it, summarizes the set of behavior—-outcome contingencies that are operative at the time the behavior occurs. Decisions to act involve choices among the alternatives as defined in the effective matrix and are made with respect to the outcomes indicated therein. The postbehavioral assessment of consequences of action are also made with respect to the outcomes in the effective matrix. (There are, however, as we argue later, some limits to the participants’ exclusive preoccupation with the effective matrix.) In short, action is both taken and evaluated with respect to the outcomes in the effective matrix. It is possible to distinguish two sets of factors or processes that contribute to the effective matrix. These operate successively in time, the second set acting on the products of the first. The distinction is facilitated by representing the first products in a given matrix. Thus we distinguish (a) a set of causal factors that generates a given matrix from (b) a set of processes elicited by the pattern of that matrix and acting to redefine it. The result of this redefinition is the effective matrix. For introductory purposes we propose to suggest the meaning of the given matrix by offering an illustration—the experimenter’s game matrix. The experimenter specifies response choices and, in terms of kinds and quantities of incentive, the consequences of various combinations of choice. The local value of each consequence (points, pennies) depends, of course, on the properties of the players. These properties include their needs and concerns, what these lead them to regard as important, their general comparison levels that affect the scaling of the consequences, their marginal utilities, depending on recent deprivation of or satiation with a given incentive, fatigue accumulated through effort required to enact behaviors, and skills determining the costs incurred. The local consequences of interpersonal interferences and facilitation effects are also represented in the given matrix. In general, as in the foregoing illustration, the given matrix is determined by environmental factors and institutional arrangements in combination with personal factors (needs, skills, etc.). The matrix is “given’’ in the sense that the behavioral choices and the outcomes are strongly under the control of factors external to the interdependence relationship itself. The outcome in each cell of the matrix—each intersecting or joint behavior—is given for the relationship by virtue of the specifications of the social and physical environment and the relevant properties of the two persons. There is no close causal nexus between the given matrix and the behavior it elicits. As we have already observed and as we show more extensively in Chapter 7, outcomes defined locally, cell by cell, as in the given matrix, do not account for behavior in interdependent relationships. What the actors often do react to is the pattern of the given matrix; for example, to the disparity between their own and the outcome of the other ina given cell, to the fact that both outcomes are high in certain cells, or to the possibilities of alternating between differentially preferred cells. In effect, by responding to aspects of pattern in the given matrix the actors transform it into a new matrix, the effective one, which is then closely linked to their behavior. It is to call special attention to this transformation process that we distinguish the given from the effective matrix. The chain of causal events leading to the effective matrix can, we think, be broken to distinguish (a) processes generating a pattern of outcomes, each outcome caused locally, without reference to the others, from (b) processes elicited by that pattern (hence specific to it) and acting on it. This is shown in Figure 1.6 in which the arrows at (a) refer to the processes by which each outcome is independently determined and the arrow at (b) refers to the process of recognizing patterns of outcomes and transforming them, that is, the transformation process. Antecedents Given matrix Effective matrix Environment Person A Behavior Person B Figure 1.6 The antecedents of the effective matrix. THE TRANSFORMATION PROCESS This generates a reformulation or reconceptualization of the matrix with respect to the behavioral choices it affords and to the consequences of various actions. The process works with the facts summarized in the given matrix; for example, consider Matrix I in Figure 1.7. Assuming that the A (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3) NE ES Matrix I Matrix II Matrix III Figure 1.7 Illustration of the transformation process. interaction is to occur on repeated occasions, the behavioral choices for the two persons may be redefined in the following terms: Person A: (1) always choose 4, (2) always choose a», (3) alternate between a, and a, Person B: (1) always choose b, (2) always choose b, For the redefined choices (consisting of policies about courses of action over many occasions) the outcomes can be stated as in Matrix II in Figure 1.7 (the entries being average outcomes per trial). The redefinition of the choices generates a new set of outcomes for the pair, a set in which each person gets something and both get the same outcome. Intuitively, it seems clear that although agreement about what to do would be difficult or impossible in the given matrix (Matrix I) it might well be possible in Matrix II. This intuition reflects the fact that certain common social values are available as a basis for agreement in II. Thus A might be heard to say “Don’t be foolish and act so that neither of us gets anything,” andB might be heard to reply, “That seems reasonable as long as you make it possible for us to share and share alike.” This conversation, invoking in simple terms the social values of common welfare and justice, reflects the possibility of applying criteria of choice in the matrix (in this case, II) other than those having to do so simply with own outcomes. Consider the extreme case in which each person sets aside his concern exclusively with his own outcomes and focuses instead on two criteria of choice: (a) the total outcomes to the pair and (b) the difference between their respective outcomes. If each person treats the first as a positive criterion (something to be attained and maximized) and the second as a negative criterion (something to be avoided), then Matrix II is transformed to become Matrix Il. In contrast to the originalgiven matrix (I) Matrix III provides a clear basis for agreement between the pair. If each could have assumed that both would reconceptualize Matrix I in this manner, explicit agreement would not even have been necessary: each would have known what to do and what the partner would do by virtue of the implicit recognition of their common interest. Matrix III, which exemplifies the effective matrix, results from two successive reformulations of Matrix I: (a) a redefinition of the choices and (b) a shifting of evaluative criteria. The transformation process may involve either or both. These particular transformations change the pattern from one of conflict to one of common interest. Other transformations would have different effects; for example, the relationship could be made more competitive tHan originally defined. Whereas the transformations illustrated above serve the common interest (if made jointly), others serve just one person’s interests. As we shall see, some given relationships (described as ‘“mixed motive’) can be transformed either in ways relating to prosocial goals and values or to exploitative purposes and selfish interests. The concept of ‘transformation process” affords a way of describing important social determinants of behavior (social values and sociotemporal organization of behavior) and of moving from the level of specific behavior to more complex social phenomena such as the interplay of different orientations to social interaction and systems of rules, roles, and norms. The separation of the analysis of antecedents of the effective matrix into pattern—independent and pattern—dependent processes brings into special focus the effects of pattern per se on behavior. This is an especially appropriate focus for social psychology inasmuch as it deals with the social and temporal organization of behavior and the application of social-value criteria to behavioral decision making. The theme of the transformation process is ‘taking account of broad considerations.” Rather than being viewed locally, outcomes are considered in the contexts provided by the matrix pattern and by the past and future. The “transforming” person is not content with the matrix as given but introduces additional considerations, such as his outcomes in relation to those of his partner and the outcomes he can attain over a long time span. Outcomes are not reacted to one by one and in isolation. They are compared and cumulated. Working within the context of the given matrix, the person sees what he can do with it—by planning, reevaluation, and reconceptualization. Note that the transformation process does not involve any direct intervention to change the structure of the given matrix. Direct intervention to alter its design is always possible, of course, and would be analogous at the macrosocial level to a distinctive, and perhaps revolutionary, change in the socioeconomic system. Here we are addressing a process that is logically and psychologically antecedent to such a possibility—a process of alterations in the cognitive and axiological significance of the given matrix. The transformation process is precluded by limited information. If the person has too little information to detect the pattern of the matrix, he cannot respond to it in a pattern—dependent way; for example, he may not know what the other’s responses are (or how many of them there are) nor the other’s outcomes. In this case he would have difficulty ascertaining properties of the pattern. This suggests one approach to a study of the transformation processes. By varying the amount of information given the actors the Sper gee of these processes can be encouraged or discouraged. The transformation process is subject to change if it is not “working.” Ordinarily people are not unconditionally altruistic or just. The “success” of any given transformation depends on what the partner does; for example, a turntaking sequence is practical only if the partner reciprocates. In the absence of reciprocation a different sequential policy will be adopted. The susceptibility of the transformation process to change according to its consequences raises the question of the learning of the components of this process. We now turn to this topic. The general assumption here is that the given matrix is, historically and developmentally, the site in which social values and social intentions (plans, rules, and roles) are learned. The Functions of the Transformation Process Referring to the example in Figure 1.7, we can see that the actions indicated by the transformed matrix (III) serve not only to yield high outcomes as defined there but also good outcomes to both persons in the given matrix. This suggests the first important function of transformations and a probable basis for their acquisition. Action within given matrices is often unsatisfactory for one or both persons; for example, if in the wellknown Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG), shown in Figure 1.8, each person independently acts in the way that is best for himself, that is, if each chooses his second response, the joint consequence is that both persons receive low outcomes. An appropriate mutual reconceptualization of the interdependence problem, afforded by the transformation process, provides a basis for joint action (a, b,) that is more satisfying to both persons even when evaluated in terms of the given matrix. In this case one such transformation involves the choice criterion of maximizing their joint score (the sum in each cell), as shown in Figure 1.8. A second function of transformations is that they provide a basis for Given Effective A Ch LD p by PDG Figure 1.8 The Prisoner's Dilemma game and a possible transformation. individual action in relation to certain given matrices in which no basis exists; for example, in the given pattern in Figure 1.9 (a pattern of simple mutual fate control) neither A nor B has a basis in his own outcomes for deciding what to do. With an outcome transformation that attaches positive value to their joint score each has a reason for choosing his first response. In the transformed matrix 4, and b, are better than their respective alternatives, regardless of what the partner selects. Given Effective A a Li, by Figure 1.9 Mutual fate control and a possible transformation. Certain given matrices do not require transformation. For these matrices there exists neither of the above reasons for (functions to be served by) transformation. Each person has a basis for action and actions taken on these bases yield satisfactory outcomes. This does not mean that such patterns will not be transformed, for example, as part of some larger “game” or by inappropriate response to their pattern. Because of the functions they serve, it is reasonable to assume that transformations may be learned. The reinforcement for their acquisition has been implied: (a) over the long run they improve the individual’s given outcomes and (b) they afford a basis for action. The latter may be assumed to be reinforcing via conflict avoidance mechanisms, cost avoidance by avoiding time loss, and/or provision of “unequivocal behavioral orientation” (Jones and Gerard, 1967). This assumption that the transformational processes are learned raises a number of interrelated questions for analysis and research. For each possible given pattern what is possible and likely to be learned? Considering the probable distribution of his experience over the set of possible patterns, what set of transformational tendencies would we expect a person to learn? On what bases does a person learn to discriminate different patterns and contingently apply different transformations? How do the preexisting transformational tendencies of his various partners influence what a person learns? Their tendencies will affect his experience with various approaches to various patterns. His learning does not take place in interaction with equally naive partners. We must consider the ‘cultural transmission’’ of transformational tendencies via experience in interaction. (We leave it to others to deal with the “direct” transmission of these tendencies, via moral teaching, propaganda, and so on.) These transformational tendencies are represented in the mature adult as social and personal values and as rules for good and/or successful social conduct. These values and rules may be prosocial, egoistical, or even antisocial in nature. It is reasonable to assume that because of their functional value these tendencies are acquired not only as instrumentally useful procedures and rules of thumb but also, by association with a broad spectrum of gratifications, as qualities of value themselves. One way of describing this process is in terms of functional autonomy: these tendencies acquire a “life of their own,” an independence of their original learning conditions; for example, justice becomes a value to be served without respect to its consequences for the self. Indeed the outcomes evaluated according to the criterion of justice (e.g., minimized difference) may become the only ones operative for the individual. Choices may be based on them, without reference, before or after the act, to own given outcomes. Functional autonomy, however, is rarely absolute. It seems unreasonable to us to assume that the transformation tendencies ever become completely independent of their functional utility. There are several reasons for this. The tendencies are many in number, often somewhat contradictory, and (at least ideally) learned in conditional rather than absolute terms. In order to obtain good given outcomes, a person cannot always invoke a particular value, such as justice. He must do so conditionally, depending on the situation and the partner. Indeed, from the point of view of good given outcomes, some situations require the opposite (maximizing the degree to which own outcomes surpass the other’s). If we assume that the person learns a repertory of transformational tendencies and their conditional application, it seems hardly likely that any one of them will be applied, even to specific situations, without regard to its consequences and without some openness to the different consequences of alternative transformations. In general, it seems likely to us that the untransformed outcomes in the given matrix have, in some final or ultimate way, an impact on the interaction. They cannot, forever and completely, be disregarded even if only because certain of them are basic to the individual’s biological survival. This is not to deny that a well-socialized, morally mature person can set aside his own outcomes and act according to purely moral and social considerations with great consistency over long periods of time. However, we find it difficult not to believe that at some level he keeps an account of the consequences of such action for his own personal welfare (i.e., in terms of outcomes in the given matrix). [In this connection our analysis shows that the functionally valuable transformations may all have self-interest (own outcomes) represented in them to some degree (as in the foregoing examples). There is no given matrix for which the purely altruistic choice criterion of maximizing other’s outcomes is more beneficial than the criterion of maximizing joint outcomes. | THE LOGICAL ANALYSIS Itis possible to identify the major types of matrix pattern systematically. It is further possible to analyze the effect on the various patterns of (a) a set of simple mathematical operations and (b) a set of simple sequences of the behavioral choices. Thus we can develop information of the sort shown in Figure 1.10, specifying for each possible pattern X the patterns X,, Xo, X3, and so on, that are generated by applying the various mathematical operations and sequential rules, singly and in combinations, to pattern The relation of this logical analysis to the model of the antecedents of the effective matrix (Figure 1.6) is apparent: X corresponds to the given matrix and pattern X, to the effective matrix. The mathematical operations and sequential rules correspond to two important aspects of the transformation process—respectively, the outcome transformations and the sequential transformations. To facilitate this analysis it is first necessary to examine closely the properties of matrices themselves. Mathematically, the effects of the mathematical operations and sequential rules depend in systematic ways Pattern Pattern XxX Pattern Y Pattern e Figure 1.10 on the properties of the initial pattern. Also the ‘‘necessity’”’ for transformation and the ‘‘success’’ of any given transformation depend on certain properties of the matrices concerned (the given and the effective matrices). Finally, the analysis of the pattern of the given matrix suggests a set of specific questions with respect to its antecedents. These are some of the topics to be considered in subsequent chapters of this book, as outlined in the following section. ABSTRACTS OF CHAPTERS In order to provide a convenient overview of the topics in this book and their sequential development, the abstracts that precede each of the chapters are presented here. Chapter 2 This chapter presents an analysis of the basic components that underlie the pattern of any outcome matrix. The analysis is applicable to both given and effective matrices. These components represent, for each person, his direct control over his own outcomes (reflexive control), the direct control over his outcomes by his partner (fate control), and the two persons’ joint control over his outcomes (behavior control). The resultant pattern of a matrix depends on how these components fit together (described in terms of correspondence and concordance) and on their relative magnitudes (weights). Chapter 3 Antecedents of the Given Matrix This chapter presents a social psychological analysis of the antecedents, both environmental and personal, of the given matrix. The analysis is made in terms of the antecedents of the components, the relations in which they stand to each other (their correspondence—noncorrespondence and concordance-discordance), and their relative magnitudes. It also provides a new perspective on the old problems of similarity, complementarity, and compatibility. Chapter 4 This chapter considers the various possible patterns of the simplest matrix (the 2 x 2) and the principal properties of the total domain of such matrices. They are classified with respect to four properties: (a) mutuality of dependence, (b) degree of dependence, (c) bases of dependence, and (d) correspondence of outcomes. Variations in the last property, which reflects commonality versus conflict of interest, are shown to depend in important ways on combinations of the first three properties. Various important patterns and common “games” are identified and located within the domain and in relation to one another. Although it is not possible to consider every possible matrix, the analysis of matrices into components (as described in Chapter 2) and the relation of these components to properties of the domain give confidence in the comprehensiveness of the exploration. Chapter 5 Properties and Indices of Interdependence Patterns This chapter proposes indices for the major properties of interdependence patterns and describes how they are related to the components of interdependence. This provides a systematic analysis of what was done intuitively in Chapter 4; namely, a delineation of the links between the properties of the matrix, on the one hand, and the components and their interrelations that underlie it, on the other. The analysis is also propaedeutic to those in Chapters 6 and 7, which show how the properties of the given matrix govern the necessity for transformations to be made and how the properties of the effective matrix depend jointly on the components of the given matrix and the particular transformations made. The analysis of the bases of correspondence-noncorrespondence reveals the factors underlying the two persons’ control over their joint outcomes and over the difference between their respective outcomes, which have implications for the discussion of the bargaining process in Chapter 10. Last, we give systematic attention to questions raised in Chapter 4 concerning the particular combinations of components and their weights necessary for optimal versions of various matrix games. Chapter 6 Logical Analysis of the Transformation Process This chapter examines the shifts in matrix pattern generated by applying various mathematical operations and sequential rules to certain given patterns. Only certain plausible transformations, corresponding to common values and temporal concepts, are investigated. These include cases in which the person (a) gives some direct weight to his partner’s outcomes in his decision-making criteria (outcome transformations), (b) attempts to be the first or second to act on a given occasion out of regard for how the choices are changed for the second actor (transpositional transformations), and (c) adopts a policy governing his successive choices over a series of interactions in the given matrix (sequential transformations). The several transformations are analyzed for the effect they have on the patterns of interdependence and therefore on such things as the components of the pattern, the correspondence or noncorrespondence of outcomes, and each person’s basis for choice. Chapter 7 Origin and Evocation of Transformations This chapter considers the factors that are broadly responsible for the occurrence of transformations. At the outset an analysis is made of the functional value of the transformations described in Chapter 6 as applied to the salient patterns of interdependence identified in Chapter 4. This analysis identifies the functional bases for learning to make, under certain conditions, particular transformations for particular patterns of the given matrix. A subsequent section briefly considers the conceptual problems associated with interpreting behavior as providing evidence of transformations. We then discuss the evidence bearing on situational factors that evoke or elicit various types of transformation. A brief review is made of evidence pertaining to the existence of individual differences in transformational tendencies. A final section points to the general theory of self-regulation of motivation that is implied by the present special theory of transformations in contexts of social interdependence. Chapter 8 Processes of Attribution and Self-Presentation This chapter analyzes the processes by which the dyadic members learn the nature of the given matrix and the transformations that are being applied to it. In discussing these processes, account is taken of the cues presented by each member and the resulting attributions made about the nature of the relationship. Ina concluding section the analysis is extended to show how self-presentational and attributional processes operate in the development of trust and intimacy and in the escalation of conflict. Chapter 9 Interdependence in Triads An analysis is made of the components of triadic interdependence. This analysis provides the basis for a discussion of the third person’s possible effects on the dyad—how the dyad can be strengthened, changed, or disrupted by a representative of the social environment. Attention is then focused on the consequences for the third person of the dyad’s behavior, viewed in terms of the power of the dyad over the “outsider.” In final sections consideration is given to full-blown, three-way interdependence with special emphasis on some phenomena unique to the triad (relative to the dyad). Chapter 10 This chapter first presents a model of independent and joint action in the dyad that identifies the framework within which negotiation between the members can occur. This framework consists of the various bargaining positions that may be available to the two persons and the settlement points that are viable in relation to the bargaining positions. A distinction is made between two types of bargaining position: (a) those created by each person simply pursuing his own interests and (b) those created explicitly, as threats, for the purpose of imposing on the other person a settlement favorable to the bargainer. The model is then extended to the triad where it forms the basis for an analysis of coalition formation—an analysis of which pair of the three persons, if any, will act in concert against the third. The bases for coalition formation exist in the mutual benefits to the coalition members of working together to create bargaining positions of the two types noted. The possibilities of coalition action are shown to increase the number of possible process and outcome patterns in the triad, compared with the dyad. Chapter 11 This chapter provides a brief interpretive commentary on the theoretical ideas presented in this book. An outline of the kind of theory developed here lists its essential points. Some historical notes relate our central assumptions and orienting ideas to those of Kurt Lewin. A final section highlights several further lines of development of the present theoretical approach.

