The Components of Interdependence The Analysis of Interdependence, The General Level of Outcomes: The Grand Mean Component, Alternative Analyses of Interdependence, Alternative Mathematical Analyses: Decompositions, Mathematical versus Social Psychological Analysis, Analysis of the Given versus the Effective Matrix, Purposes of the Mathematical Analysis, Some Formal Considerations, Ppa oe ve Teal op an oye 9 ae > oe ne au is ene Ch edrg? bape real ee toyed Repent Pp wt Se val | eared gaged): pi Bis yey ee ke bet rie? Vath, gine ve beth wit aires an, > wilh 1, vaayt veh. bene munetiad fai Ma at oy a 1y pechiasacale ag ; ABSTRACT This chapter presents an analysis of the basic components that underlie the pattern of any outcome matrix. The analysis is applicable to both given and effective matrices. These components represent, for each person, his direct control over his own outcomes (reflexive control), the direct control over his outcomes by his partner (fate control), and the two persons’ joint control over his outcomes (behavior control). The resultant pattern of a matrix depends on how these components fit together (described in terms of correspondence and concordance) and on their relative magnitudes (weights). Person A’s control over person B’s outcomes may be absolute or contingent. In the first case, by simply varying what he does, A can produce a variation in B’s outcomes. We have described this as fate control (FC) because A has absolute control over B’s fate (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). In the second case A’s effect on B’s outcomes is contingent on what B does; therefore they jointly affect B’s outcomes. We have described this as behavior control (BC) because when A varies his behavior he makes it desirable for B to vary his also (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). All dyadic relationships characterized by interdependence are based on A’s fate control and/or behavior control over B and B’s fate control and/or behavior control over A. These four elements reflect, respectively, four basic sets of evaluations: (a) B’s evaluations of A’s actions, (b) B’s evaluations of their joint activities, (c) A’s evaluations of B’s actions, and (d) A’s evaluations of their joint activities. Interdependence exists in the relationship only if B has differential evaluations (i.e., preferences) in one or both of these respects and if the same is true for A. If only A or B have such preferences, the relation is one of unilateral dependence rather than mutual dependence (interdependence). Two further sets of evaluations play an important role in the pattern of interdependence; namely, each person’s differential evaluations of his own behaviors. We refer to them as his reflexive control (RC) because as the person varies his actions he has an effect back upon himself affecting his own outcomes. These evaluations have no direct relation to the degree of interdependence but markedly affect the manner in which it is expressed and is likely to be dealt with. These six sets of differential evaluations, essential to the characterization of any pattern of interdependence, may be conveniently summarized by three matrices, one showing the bilateral reflexive control (BRC) component of the relationship, a second showing the mutual fate control (MFC) component, and a third showing the mutual behavior control (MBC) component; for example, Figure 2.1 shows particular matrices for the three components and the relationship that, in combination, they constitute. Figure 2.1 might reflect the particular facet of a husband and wife relationship that concerns their activities at 5:30 in the evening when he arrives home from work. Each has two salient options: to have a cocktail or to go bicycling. The four cells in the matrix represent the four possible combinations of their respective behaviors, including the cases in which they have cocktails together and go cycling together and also those in which one drinks while the other cycles. The number in the upper-right portion of each cell indicates the wife’s outcome for that particular event and the number in the lower-left portion, the husband’s outcome. The higher the number, the greater the satisfaction the indicated person derives from that combination of their behaviors. The BRC component in Figure 2.1 shows that drinking is preferred by the husband as an activity for himself and cycling is preferred (and somewhat more strongly so) by the wife for herself. The MFC component reveals that the wife prefers that, other things being equal, the husband go bicycling. Perhaps she regards it as the healthier thing for him to do; it makes her feel comfortable about his well being. Finally, the MBC component shows that both prefer doing the same activity to doing different ones. Both prefer that they do whatever they do at the same time, as might reflect the satisfactions they gain from undertaking such activities together. The overall pattern of their interdependence with regard to these activities represents a simple summation of the components; the values in each position of the resultant matrix at the right are derived by simply adding up the three values in the corresponding positions of the component matrices. Wife Cycling Drinking RS RS RS Bilateral reflexive Mutual fate Mutual behavior Resultant control control control Figure 2.1 Components of hypothetical husband and wife relationship. COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE Thus the resultant relationship, the overall pattern of interdependence, consists of the three components. More properly, it may consist of three components because one may have only zero entries (or the same value in all cells) reflecting a lack of differential evaluation in one or more of the six respects listed. For the relationship to be considered one of interdependence it is necessary that there be variation over the outcome entries for each person in either the MFC component, the MBC component, or both. Within a given component there may be asymmetry between the two persons. This is illustrated in both the BRC and MFC components of Figure 2.1. The latter component shows that although the husband’s choice exercises fate control over the wife he has no preference about what she does (except as she does things in conjunction with his own activities—reflected in the MBC matrix). Strictly speaking, there is no mutual fate control in Figure 2.1. However, we use the label “mutual fate control’’ to refer to the component matrix whatever the values occurring there. Figure 2.1 also illustrates another important property of the components: they may differ in magnitude. It is clear that in this particular part of our hypothetical husband and wife relationship the most important facts are their own preferences about what they themselves do. If we imagine how the two might make their decisions in this situation, the greater magnitude of the evaluative differentiations reflected in the BRC component, relative to those in other components, suggests that this husband and wife will probably be guided by these simple, asocial preferences, each tending to go his own way, she on her Schwinn and he in his Martini. If our hypothetical pair consistently follows the dictates of its respective reflexive controls, the consequences will be that neither will ever gain the highest levels of satisfaction possible for him or her in this portion of their relationship. Thus the wife will never have the pleasure of her husband’s company and the sense of reassurance from his healthful activity that would be possible if they both went cycling together. Similarly, he will never know the delight of her conversation over a drink. To putit another way, if each one is to achieve the highest level of outcome available in this part of their relationship, the other one must make do, at least on that occasion, with rather low outcomes. This last feature of our example points to an important property of the pattern of interdependence, namely the degree of correspondence versus noncorrespondence between the two persons’ outcomes in the various cells. This property determines in crucial ways the problems created for the persons by their interdependence and the process likely to characterize their interaction. The reader will appreciate intuitively the significance of correspondence versus noncorrespondence by realizing that it summarizes how similar or compatible the two persons are and determines how cooperative or competitive their relationship is likely to be. The comments in the preceding paragraph reflect the degree of noncorrespondence of outcomes in the resultant matrix for our husband and wife, a degree partially described by noting that it is not possible for both to attain their maximum outcomes at the same time. Now let us consider a slight variation in our example. Figure 2.2 presents the same three components as Figure 2.1 but the MBC component is differently oriented. In Figure 2.2 the husband’s and wife’s evaluations of their joint activities have shifted so that rather than both preferring to do one or the other together both prefer different ones. This might be the case, for example, if, on the one hand, she simply cannot stand to watch him drink and he is embarrassed if she does; on the other hand, their joint cycling activities are also somehow mutually unsatisfactory. The result of this different set of preferences is to produce an MBC component more in accord with the dominant BRC component of the relationship; that is, their mutual desire to engage in separate activities coincides with their “reflexive’”’ preferences for different activities. The net effect is to generate a pattern characterized by a higher degree of correspondence of outcomes. In contrast to Figure 2.1 the resultant in Figure 2.2 permits the husband and wife to gain their respective highest levels of satisfaction at the same time. Wife Cycling Drinking BRERA RES Bilateral reflexive Mutual fate Mutual behavior Resultant control control control Figure 2.2 Same relationship as in Figure 2.1 but with MBC concordant with BRC. This example indicates that the pattern of the interdependence depends not only on the three components and their relative magnitudes (to be referred to as weights) but also on their positioning in relation to one another—how they mesh together. We refer to this meshing by the terms concordant and discordant. The MBC and BRC components are concordant in Figure 2.2 and discordant in Figure 2.1. In a similar manner COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE the MFC may be concordant with the MBC when, for example, in their exercise of fate control in a manner favorable to each other’s outcome, they also satisfy one of the coordination requirements in the MBC pattern. A discordant relation would exist between MFC and MBC when the actions reflecting mutually benevolent use of fate control converge on cells that are mutually low in the MBC matrix. Further, BRC may be concordant or discordant with the MFC component—concordant if it is consistent with a person’s exercising his fate control in a manner favorable to the other person and discordant if it is consistent with his using fate control to the opposite effect. In our example the husband’s RC is discordant with his FC over his wife. As he pursues his own immediate preferences (regarding his own actions) he takes the action less favorable to her. Now it becomes plain why BRC, although having nothing directly to do withinterdependence, is an essential ingredient in our analysis. It is in its possible concordant or discordant relations with MFC and MBC that the BRC component affects the pattern of interdependence and thereby the course of the relationship. This is a formal way of expressing the simple fact that the individual’s preferences about his own actions affect the manner in which he takes (or is tempted to take) those actions and his exercise of both fate and behavior control over his partner. One final factor contributes to the overall degree of correspondence—namely, the correspondence or noncorrespondence within the MBC component itself. Our examples have included only highly correspondent MBC components, but the reader can imagine cases of noncorrespondence; for example, the wife might prefer doing things together as in Figure 2.1 but the husband might prefer separate activities as in Figure 2.2. As we shall see, intermediate degrees of correspondence in the MBC component reflect the fact of different strengths of preferences between the two persons in regard to their joint behaviors. The MFC and BRC components do not vary in degree of correspondence. The two sets of entries in each of these matrices vary independently (in the language of mathematics they are orthogonal); so the degree of correspondence (or of noncorrespondence) within the component matrices is always zero. THE ANALYSIS OF INTERDEPENDENCE The examples in the preceding section show how we can construct or synthesize various interpersonal relationships. Given certain examples of each component matrix, we can synthesize the resultant relationship by adding the components together. Let us now consider the opposite procedure in which, given a resultant matrix, we analyze it to determine what its components are and how they fit together. The analysis of rectangular arrangements of numbers such as our outcome matrices is made possible by a procedure derived from what is known in statistics as the analysis of variance. We take for an example a relationship investigated experimentally by Guyer and Rapoport (1970) and described by them as a “‘threat-vulnerable game.” We refer to it simply as a threat game. As shown in Figure 2.3, the relation is asymmetrical. The interaction tends to be one in which A acts as a kind of ‘allocator’ of the outcomes in the relationship (by shifting back and forth betweena, anda, while B doesb,) andB acts asa “‘threatener,” threatening to use his ability to reduce their joint outcomes (as ata2b2) toinduce A to be fair in his allocation. Figure 2.3. Threat game used by Guyer and Rapoport. The analysis of the relationship in the threat game can be illustrated by first considering only B’s outcomes and determining what components contribute to variation in them. Figure 2.4 shows how this analysis is conducted. As a first step the averages are determined for each row and column and are shown arrayed around the total matrix at the left. These averages are then compared to determine how much reflexive control B exercises in this relationship. Because his average outcome for b, is 14.0 and for b, 6.5, his reflexive control is 7.5, the difference between these values. This is indicated by placing 7.5 in each upper cell of the RC component (inasmuch as), is the more valued action) and 0 in each lower cell. Similarly, A’s fate control over B is determined by comparing the two averages beneath the game matrix. The difference (17.5 — 3.0 = 14.5) indicates how much, on the average, B prefers a; to a, and this fact is appropriately indicated in the FC component. This reflects the degree to which B is subject to fate control by A’s actions. Finally, although A’s behavior control over B can be calculated directly, like the first two COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE AS SRE Threat game B’s RC Bs FC B's BC Weights: RC, = +7.5 FC, = +14.5 BC, = —2.5 Figure 2.4 Analysis of components of variation in B’s outcomes in the threat game. components, it is most readily determined as a difference by subtracting RC + FC from the original matrix; that is, for each cell in the BC component we calculate what value must be entered there if the three component values are to add up to the total value. In cell a,b, of the BC component in our example there must be —2.0 in order for the components (7.5 + 14.5 — 2.0) to summate to 20. If the arithmetic is done correctly, all the rows and columns in the BC component will yield the same total (in the example, —1.5). Below each component matrix in Figure 2.4 we have indicated B’s weight for that component. This ‘component weight” simply indicates the magnitude of the difference in B’s outcomes produced by each source of control. Thus B’s FC weight (FC,) of 14.5 indicates that he is subject to fate control to the extent of 14.5 units. These weights are given algebraic signs to indicate whether B’s outcomes are higher in the upper left (@,b,) cell (indicated by a positive sign) or not (indicated by a negative sign). Thus B’s RC and FC weights have positive signs because in both cases his high component values occur in the a,b, cell. His BC weight (BCs), calculated by taking the difference between his high and low values in the MBC component matrix, is given a negative sign because his lower outcome occurs in the a,b, cell. The BC, weight of —2.5 summarizes the fact that as far as the BC component is concerned B’s outcomes are 2.5 units higher in the a,b, and a,b, cells than in the a,b, and a,b, cells. Following this procedure, we can also analyze the sources of variation in A’s outcomes and, putting this analysis together with that of B, we have the complete analysis of the threat game into its components, as shown in Figure 2.5. Each person’s component weights, with appropriate signs, are shown below each component matrix. The essential properties of this relationship are revealed by the analysis. A and B have more control over each other’s outcomes than over their own; that is, they have more fate control than reflexive control. The essence of their interdependence is MFC; the bit of MBC is relatively Threat game BRC MFC MBC SRS Weights: RC, = —6.5 E@ = st .3 BC, = +1.5 RC, = +7.5 FC, = +14.5 BC, = —2.5 Figure 2.5 Complete analysis for both A’s and B’s outcomes in the threat game. unimportant. (The small degree of MBC present in the relationship is characterized by noncorrespondence. The reader will note that this fact is indicated both by the pattern in the component matrix and by the opposite signs of BC, and BC.) Additionally, B’s RC is concordant with his FC over A but A’s RC is discordant with his FC over B; that is, B’s RC tends to induce him to take the action that A prefers, whereas A’s RC tends to induce him to take the action B does not prefer. (The reader will note that these facts are not only represented in the matrices but are also reflected in the signs of the weights: RC; has the same sign as FC,, which is the FC that B exercises over A; and RC, has the opposite sign from FC z, which is the FC that A exercies over B.) This combination of concordance and discordance creates the essential properties of the relationship, B tending to the action that is to their mutual advantage and A tending to take the one that is to his own advantage (and to B’s disadvantage). The latter creates the situation in which B may have to take his “threat action” (b.) in an attempt to induce A to perform, at least sometimes, action 4). Action b, is properly called a threat action because B must incur some loss himself in order to reduce A’s outcomes. Thus b, is something B would rather not do but that he probably will do if he must in order to influence A. The analysis of a pattern of interdependence made in the manner just outlined has an important property: it provides a unique analysis for every pattern. Given a specific pattern of interdependence, the analysis shows us (a) the relative values each person places on his own actions, the other’s actions, and their joint actions, (b) the nature of the concordances among the sets of preferences, and (c) the degree of correspondence or noncorrespondence within the MBC component. Thus all the ingredients that go to make up the total relationship are revealed in a precise and unique manner. (However, for a qualification of the uniqueness point see page 42.) Furthermore, the analysis is applicable to every matrix of any size—not only 2 x 2, but 3 x 3 matrices, 5 x 2 matrices, and so on. Important for the consideration of groups larger than dyads is the fact that COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE the analysis also works for 2 x 2 x 2 and higher order matrices. As we show in Chapter 9, however, the number of components increases sharply with the number of persons involved in the interdependence. This discussion can be summarized by a theoretical statement: all patterns of dyadic interdependence can be viewed as resultants or compounds of the three components BRC, MFC, and MBC. This assertion has analytic and synthetic implications. Analytically, any given pattern of interdependence can be analyzed into a unique set of three component matrices. The analysis reveals the three component weights for each person and how the various types of control fit together (i.e., their concordant-discordant and correspondent—noncorrespondent relations). Synthetically, from different combinations of the three component matrices all possible patterns of interdependence can be constructed. In Chapter 4 we employ the synthetic implication of the analysis to explore the domain of possible patterns and to note the salient types. THE GENERAL LEVEL OF OUTCOMES: THE GRAND MEAN COMPONENT In our analyses of matrices so far we have not considered one important property of the matrix, namely, the general level of its outcomes. The most complete way to characterize a resultant matrix is in terms of four sets of values: the magnitude of the BRC, MFC, and MBC components and the two grand means. The magnitudes of the grand means have been concealed by the procedures we have considered so far because they are buried in the pairs of values by which we have chosen to show the BRC, MFC, and MBC components. The grand means are revealed if we use the particular method of analysis shown in Figure 2.6. The pattern, an asymmetrical one, consists of BRC, MFC, and MBC. When the three components are represented by symmetric positive and negative values, as in Figure 2.6, a final matrix with a constant value for each person must be Resultant EIN EN LN NEN +6 NIL IN EN = DS RC, = +4 FC, = —2 Bey e= 6.7 GMa ="5 Figure 2.6 Analysis with grand mean included. added to account for the resultant matrix. These values are the grand means for each person—28/4 or 7 for person A and 20/4 or 5 for person B in our example. (The calculations are easiest if the grand mean or GM matrix is first determined directly from the averages and the MBC component is found by subtraction in the last step of the analysis.) The significance of the grand means for the two persons dependson what the matrix represents. In the usual case the matrix describes behavioral choices the two persons make within their relationship (as in the example of the husband’s and wife’s choices between drinking and cycling). The grand means indicate in general how rewarding this portion of their relationship is to them. If each person’s outcomes are scaled in relation to his best alternatives (following our suggestion regarding the comparison level for alternatives, Thibaut and Kelley, 1959), his grand mean reflects the general satisfactoriness of this relationship, or the particular portion of it, relative to other alternative relationships. Of course, the grand mean reflects the average of all the person’s outcomes in the matrix. Depending on the course of the interaction between the two persons, their average experienced outcomes may be higher or lower than the grand means. The latter reflect only the general level of possibilities in the situation summarized by the matrix. In a different use of the matrix, one we have not illustrated so far, each person’s choices are between being in a relationship with the particular partner or being in some other social location. (A person whose choice to be in this particular relationship is not reciprocated is, of course, left in an uncomfortable limbo to which the alternative location is generally preferable.) In this case the grand means reflect each person’s general level of outcomes derived from the particular sort of relationship with respect to which the choices are being made. The outcomes might be scaled according to each person’s comparison level for such relationships (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959), in which case the grand means would reflect overall satisfaction—dissatisfaction with this type of relationship. A different example suggests another role of the grand means in describing interdependence. Figure 2.7 presents three different versions of ‘’Chicken,’”” a pattern consisting of MFC and MBC combined discordantly, the former being the more important of the two. This pattern has taken its name from its alleged correspondence to the contest that pairs of young men have been known to play with their automobiles, racing toward each other at high speed down the center of a highway. The one who first veers to one side in order to avoid a collision is identified as being cowardly or ‘‘chicken.’”” In one important respect the patterns reflect this situation: the riskier choice is also the one that enables a person to beat the other. Thus, if A takes the risky choice (D) but B is unwilling to, COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE Resultant MFC MBC GM (chicken) D Figure 2.7 Three versions of Chicken differing only in grand mean. A clearly outstrips B in terms of payoff. Thus the relationship provides an opportunity to demonstrate one’s willingness to take risk and to outshine another person in this respect. However, another aspect of the real life game of Chicken, the danger, is not well represented unless the grand mean is very low. As shown in Figure 2.7, when the grand mean is high, both persons at worst come out with nothing. Risk exists here only in the sense of variance in possible gains and not in the sense of danger of loss. The versions with negative grand means seem to be more appropriate analogues to the real-life situation, the middle version being the best. With a grand mean of —3 for each person, the relationship is one in which, if both refuse to play the game (i.e., both play C), neither one wins or loses anything. It is only as one insists on gaining some reward from the situation and creates the possible loss for the other one that the interaction runs the risk of leading to large losses for both. In the comments above we are clearly assuming that the meaning of variability in outcomes depends not only on its magnitude but also on where, within some total range of outcomes, it occurs. Avoiding a loss (to have a zero outcome rather than a —12) is usually different from making a large gain rather then a small one (18 rather than 6). Similarly, to gain a given amount from a zero level (0 to 10) is usually different psychologically from gaining the same amount from a high level (going from 30 to 40). We are referring to the relation between given and transformed outcomes and recognizing the nonlinear function and the asymmetries between positive and negative outcomes that sometimes characterize the relation. We have more to say about these matters in Chapter 6. ALTERNATIVE ANALYSES OF INTERDEPENDENCE The foregoing procedure for the analysis of interdependence is recommended on the basis of the simplicity of its calculations and the vividness with which it reveals the relative magnitudes of the several sources of variation in the matrix. The analysis, however, is arbitrary in several ways that we now discuss. Alternative Mathematical Analyses: Decompositions In our analysis of the matrix in Figure 2.4 we represent B’s reflexive control of 7.5 units by entering 7.5 in each upper cell of the BRC component and 0 in each lower cell. To do so is arbitrary. We might, instead, enter any pair of numbers in the two sets of cells as long as they differ by 7.5 units. Then, depending on the pair of values we use to represent the two levels of RC, B’s values in the MFC and MBC components must be adjusted accordingly. This point is most readily illustrated by Pruitt’s study of decompositions of the Prisoner’s Dilemma game (1967). This game, shown in the matrix in Figure 2.8, derives its name froma story about two prisoners who are being held in separate cells after their arrest for a major crime. The evidence in the hands of the district attorney is such that they can be convicted only if either one confesses to the crime. The choice of confessing is indicated by D in the matrix and the choice of remaining mum, by C. The outcomes of 6 in the matrix specify the consequences of both confessing and being convicted and the outcomes of 12, the consequences of both being acquitted. If only one confesses, he is rewarded by being set free and having a prior minor charge dropped (indicated by the value of 18). In this case the other one is convicted and given a more severe sentence than if he too had turned state’s evidence (an outcome indicated by the 0 payoff). Each prisoner faces the dilemma created by his realization that (a) regardless of what his partner does he himself is better COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE off confessing than maintaining silence, but (b) if both act according to the logic of (a) they will be convicted, whereas with mutual silence they could have been acquitted. (It is perhaps unfortunate that this relationship has become so strongly associated with this particular story. As we shall see, the pattern is characteristic of many types of ‘“exchange” relationship that have nothing to do with crime or penalties.) Pruitt had some subjects play the PDG shown in Figure 2.8 in its matrix form (Game I). After both subjects had independently chosen C or D the pair of choices was referred to the matrix to determine the outcome of each. In other conditions the game was presented in one of the three decomposed forms shown in Games II, III, and IV in Figure 2.8. The consequences of the C and D choices were shown separately for the self and for the partner and were reported back separately, each person receiving an outcome after his own choice and again after his partner’s choice. It can be seen that “your gains” represent the BRC component of the PDG and “‘other’s gains,”” the MFC component. As shown in Figure 2.9, the three decomposed cases represent three different ways of specifying the BRC and MFC components, Game III corresponding to the method of analysis we have already described. The reader will be able to determine for himself that these are only three of an infinite variety of ways of representing the BRC and MBC components. The only properties that the three cases have in common (and that all such decompositions must have) are (a) that the magnitudes of the differences reflecting degree of reflexive and fate control are, respectively, 6 and 12, (b) that the BRC and MFC components are oriented discordantly, and (c) that the values in GC D D Game | Your Other's Your Other’s Your Other’s gains = gains gains gains gains gains E Cie Dae D D Game II Game III Game IV Figure 2.8 Pruitt’s Prisoner's Dilemma game in matrix form (Game I) and three decomposed forms (Games II to IV). Ree Gae po NINN ae ac inet ells VAVA VAVE TAYE VA Figure 2.9 Matrix representation of Pruitt’s three decompositions of the Prisoner's Dilemma game. the C,C cell add up to 12 for each person. The first two conditions mean that all three cases in Figure 2.9 have the same component weights for the two persons: RC, = RCg=—6; FC, = FCs =+12. The last condition, together with the other two, ensures that all the cell values will add up to those in the resultant matrix. Pruitt’s decompositions make it clear that our analysis of the matrix yields a solution that is unique in a special way. It is unique only with respect to the magnitude of the differences between the values each person places on his own two actions, on the partner’s two actions, or on different combinations of their actions; that is to say, it is unique with respect to the component weights for the two persons. In Chapter 7 we consider the results from Pruitt’s studies which show that the particular way in which the PD game is represented has large effects on the resulting interactions. These results are not entirely surprising in view of the different emphases that the several decompositions give to the cost versus reward aspects of the interchange; for example, COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE Game II highlights the cost that must be imposed on the partner if one is to increase one’s own outcomes directly. In contrast, Game IV highlights the necessity of incurring costs oneself if one is to increase the rewards provided to the partner. Thus the different decompositions imply that different psychological bases underlie the resultant patterns. The different bases of component and resultant matrices are considered at length in Chapter 3. Hamburger (1969) has described the patterns that are decomposable in the manner followed by Pruitt as ‘‘separable games.” These are patterns consisting only of BRC and MFC components. It should also be noted that games with MBC components are subject to many different minimal—component analyses. Figure 2.10 shows three different analyses for a pattern knownas the Battle of the Sexes, which is composed of MFC and MBC, the latter being the larger in magnitude and the two being meshed discordantly. These different ways of thinking about the relationship have not been studied empirically but it seems likely that they would generate different patterns of interaction. They appear to emphasize Resultant Game II NET iS SANS SSNS). SS. NINO AN RIS SN. QS... NN RIN Figure 2.10 Alternative analyses of the Battle of the Sexes. differentially the importance of helping (or avoiding hurting) the partner and of achieving coordination (or of avoiding incoordination). For this reason they are likely to produce different initial rates of C response and different interpretations of the actions that are taken. Mathematical versus Social Psychological Analysis The comments in the preceding section are addressed to the alternative simple mathematical analyses that can be made of a given interdependence matrix. Each of these analyses is the simplest possible in the sense that only the minimally necessary set of components consisting of MFC and/or MBC and possibly BRC, is involved. One implication of the preceding discussion is that there are many such simplest analyses and any arbitrary decision about which one to make may fail to represent the analysis the participants make of their own relationship—the way they separate out the issues and values it involves. The present section pursues the distinction between mathematical and social psychological analysis and raises the possibility that none of the alternative simple mathematical analyses may reflect the psychological and social factors underlying the pattern of interdependence. Therefore none of them may capture the components as the participants think about them. Consider the example shown in Figure 2.11 which might characterize Mathematical analysis ces | I Husband PNEX Social psychological analysis Saag Resultant Costs of cleaning Negative value of Costs of cleaning alone not cleaning Figure 2.11 A comparison of mathematical and social-psychological analysis of the cleaning example. COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE the relationship between a young husband and wife in regard to their doing various cleaning chores around their apartment. Let us say that each weekend the choice of each one is between cleaning or not and the consequences are as indicated in the matrix. The mathematical analysis shows that the interdependence involves only two components, BRC and MFC, the latter being more important than the former and the two being meshed in a discordant manner. Each person prefers slightly not to clean and strongly to have the partner clean. (Reference to the preceding section will show that we are again dealing with the Prisoner’s Dilemma game.) An hypothetical social psychological analysis of the relationship is presented in the lower portion of Figure 2.11. This is what might be revealed by asking the couple about the cleaning chores: how much effort it takes to do them alone and together, how each one feels about it if he or she cleans and the spouse does not, and how uncomfortable it is to let the cleaning go altogether. Alternatively, these outcomes might be inferred from a job analysis of the cleaning chores, which might indicate how much mutual interference they involve, and from attitude scales assessing opinions and values about tidiness and fairness. The analysis in Figure 2.11 indicates that the modest costs of doing the cleaning are shareable if both do it, that each one suffers sizable additional costs when he or she does the cleaning alone (e.g., through feelings of inequity), and that the costs of not having the cleaning done at all are even higher. Several points can be made by reference to this example: (a) the components in the social psychological analysis are themselves complex matrices which can be analyzed into mathematically simpler components. In fact, each of the three components in the lower portion of Figure 2.11 is a mixture of BRC, MFC, and MBC (cf. Figure 2.12). (b) We have identified three social psychological components in this particular example, but in practice the empirical analysis of, any given interdependence pattern might yield any number of such components. This is in contrast to the mathematical analysis that always yields at most the three components (four, if we include GM). (c) Most important of all, the example in Figure 2.11 suggests that the mathematical analysis may not always be useful for understanding the actual elements or components that go to make up certain relationships as they exist in real life. These natural elements are likely themselves to be complex mixtures of BRC, MFC, and MBC. Certainly, when people report to us the factors that underly their interdependence, they are not likely to have them sorted out into the three minimally necessary mathematical terms. We have more to say about the social-psychological components of interdependence in Chapter 3, in which we consider the antecedents of the given matrix. Further, in Chapters 6 and 7, in which we analyze the process by which the given matrix is transformed into the effective one, we consider how persons may focus selectively on one psychological aspect of the relationship or another (similar to those shown in the lower portion of Figure 2.11), depending on their current intentions and preoccupations. Analysis of the Given versus the Effective Matrix The reader may wonder at this point which of the matrices has been subjected to mathematical analysis, the given or the effective. The answer is that we may analyze one or both, depending on our purposes. We certainly want to analyze and classify interdependence patterns as they are given. This analysis is basic to our argument, inasmuch as it identifies the various types of matrix, their properties, and the problems they pose. It affords the basis for identifying the functions that various transformations might serve in solving those problems and consequently for speculating about what transformations may be learned and the conditions under which they are likely to be elicited. The analysis of the effective matrix, identifying its components and their concordances and discordances, reveals how the transformation process shifts the terms of the relationship. As shown in Chapter 6, it is often possible to state the relations systematically between the given and the effective matrices by formulas that link the components of the two. Purposes of the Mathematical Analysis If, as some of the preceding examples (such as Figure 2.11) suggest, the mathematical analysis does not always reveal the social psychological foundations of the interdependence, then of what use is it? At least three answers, some implied in the preceding paragraphs, can be offered at this point. First, as we show in Chapter 4, the components defined mathematically are exceedingly useful in identifying the various types of matrix. Given a classification of matrices, the mathematical analysis of the component weights of a specific matrix is useful for defining or characterizing it so that it can be located in relation to the classes. Second, the mathematical analysis of the resultant matrix points to the kinds of specific problem the pair must cope with if they are to realize to the fullest the potential benefits of their relationship. The relative magnitudes of the three components and their various concordances indicate, for example, the relaCOMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE tive importance of developing coordination rules compared with exercising control over own preferences in the interest of helping each other. Third, the mathematical analysis of the natural components constituting a relationship reveals how they fit together, interact, and summate or cancel one another out. This is illustrated in Figure 2.12, which provides the mathematical analysis of the three social psychological components for the cleaning example in Figure 2.11. Comparison of the three analyses shows several important facts. Even though all components involve MBC, they mesh in a manner that cancels out each other’s effect, and so the resultant matrix is characterized only by MFC and BRC. The several MFC components are oriented so that they summate, thus producing a strong preference for the partner’s doing the cleaning. The BRC components, though individually strong, tend to cancel one another out; the result is a weak BRC pushing each person not to clean. Thus in combination the several social—-psychological factors simply yield MFC greater than and discordant with BRC, the Prisoner’s Dilemma Game. Component Figure 2.12 Analysis of the three social-psychological components in the cleaning example. SOME FORMAL CONSIDERATIONS The analysis of the matrix in terms of three component matrices amounts to making simultaneously two analyses of variance of the matrix, one of A’s outcomes and the other of B’s outcomes. This is shown in Figure 2.13 for the matrix already described in Figure 2.6. Ina2 x 2 matrix the sums of squares for each component is simply the square of the difference corresponding to the weight of each component. Thus for A’s outcomes in Figure 2.13 the sum of squares for columns is 22, for rows, 62, and for interaction, 4”, the total sum of squares is 4 plus 36 plus 16, or 56. The percentage of the total variance accounted for by each component is simply the proportion of the total sum of squares for which its sum of square accounts; these values are 7, 64, and 29%, respectively, for the three components in the example. We are not the first to suggest the analysis of variance as a means of characterizing interdependence matrices. This possibility has been worked out in various degrees of detail by Wilson and Bixenstine (1962), Wyer (1969), and Wolf (1972). One probable reason why the application of analysis of variance to interdependence matrices has not been fully developed (and one reason why objections will be raised to the present analysis) is that it requires making strong assumptions about the nature of the measurement scales underlying the values in the matrix. Analysis of the variance components requires treating the numbers as if they were taken from an interval scale, that is, a scale on which a difference of n units between any two values means the same thing regardless of what those two values are. Treating the grand mean as an interpretable term requires the further assumption that the numbers come from a scale with a meaningful zero point. Further, when we compare the components for the two persons, as in describing the magnitude of A’s RC (RC,) relative to his FC over B (FC,), it is necessary to assume that the numbers are comparable interpersonally. We can admit of little confidence that these assumptions will be justified in the many real-life problems to which interdependence analysis will be applied. We are, however, impressed with the progress that has been made in psychology on similar problems by proceeding as if such assumptions were generally warranted. It seems to be the practical experience in psychological measurement and analysis that limiting oneself to the assumptions that are strictly justified (e.g., of ordinal measurement) is not so productive as being somewhat incautious by accepting stronger assumptions. Furthermore, the stronger assumptions can be made merely for purposes of theoretical analysis. We can simply state that we are assuming that we have numbers froma ratio scale at the outset WS ‘xEyeur aduapuadapiajur ue zo SOURLIPA siskyeue ay] 49g =4Oy :siyBia ob S,@) (OY S,) (94 8,4) 198433 x y 193jJ3 Moy 3024}3 UWNjo9 SaWod}no sg "OU :siyBiay rife (9€ S,¥) (94 S,V) (OY S,¥) Waa xy W9ajj9 Moy }0aj43 uWN|OD sawoo}no sy €l'Z amnsry of our analysis. Proceeding on this basis permits us to conduct a form of theoretical analysis that is much more powerful and illuminating than an analysis consistent with weaker assumptions would be. The evidence for this last statement may be found in the insights and implications presented in the following chapters, which the reader may judge for himself.

