Antecedents of the Given Matrix Antecedents of the Components, Antecedents of Correspondence, Correspondent versus Noncorrespondent MBC, Concordance between BRC and MFC, Concordance between BRC and MBC, Concordance between MFC and MBC, Similarity versus Complementarity, Antecedents of Component Weights, Antecedents of the Grand Means, Prt thi ” fiat) a nee ere fe legen aren pres a be te iver Fy eet ve sharsarorpec? iad te | Sa se rebrk casing lune I « {8 OM bee A Awworbod ¢ bet D8 ne an 4 bee Si ee ee a oMnweie tvpnecgaa Ne at mt ABSTRACT This chapter presents a social psychological analysis of the antecedents, both environmental and personal, of the given matrix. The analysis is made in terms of the antecedents of the components, the relations in which they stand to each other (their correspondence-noncorrespondence and concordance-discordance), and their relative magnitudes. It also provides a new perspective on the old problems of similarity, complementarity, and compatibility. The outcome values in the given matrix are determined by features of the social and physical environment or setting in interaction with qualities and states of the dyadic members—their needs and skills. We assume further that the reward and cost values of the outcomes in the given matrix will have been affected by each member’s general comparison level, by his recent history of deprivation or satiation with a given incentive, by fatigue developed through the effort required to enact behaviors, and by skills determining the costs of behavioral enactments. What we are concerned with in the following pages are the ways in which environmental or situational factors interact with these personal factors of need and skill to determine the components of a given matrix and the relationships of the components. The environmental factors that we consider are those affecting the quality and kinds of resource available to the members and spatio-temporal constraints that may impose coordination requirements on them. We use the term environment very broadly to include natural settings and man-made arrangements and regulations. Hence the environments we refer to may result from the decisions of psychological experimenters, legislators, industrial engineers, union—management negotiations, and parents. On the side of the personal factors this chapter constitutes an analysis, in interdependence terms, of the personal properties that affect the compatibility of the dyadic members. The classic interpersonal rubrics of “similarity” and “complementarity” are viewed in new terms; for example, an important aspect of similarity is reflected in the analysis of personal factors that produce correspondence or noncorrespondence in MBC between the two persons. One particular form of complementarity exists when the two can, by different actions, reward each other (MFC) and when the RC of each is concordant with the FC he exercises over his partner. The antecedents of compatibility or incompatibility are not exhaustively considered here, however, because some of them have to do with pattern transformations. In Chapter 7 compatibility is viewed from the perspective of social and personal values. We show how, depending on the given pattern of interdependence, certain pairings of value orientations are mutually supportive of the relationship and others are disruptive. A word about terminology: in Chapter 2 we demonstrated the analysis of a resultant matrix into three component matrices. We used the terms BRC, MFC, and MBC to refer to them. At the same time we noted that within a component matrix the weights for the two persons may be equal or different. Thus in the MFC matrix FC, may be smaller or larger than FC; in absolute magnitude or they may be equal. (Of course, if FC, = 0 and FC; is not zero, then, strictly speaking, no mutual fate control exists but MFC may still be used to refer to that particular component matrix.) In this and subsequent chapters, when we state that a relationship involves a particular component, say BRC, unless further qualification is added we mean that both persons have reflexive control and that the absolute magnitudes of their component weights are approximately equal. Similarly, a relationship characterized by MBC is one in which both persons are subject to about the same degree of behavior control (|BC,|=|BCa| and both are greater than zero). The signs of the respective weights (and the relative signs of the weights of different components) are implied by comments about concordance and correspondence. ANTECEDENTS OF THE COMPONENTS The components of bilateral reflexive control derive from each person’s preferences and aversions about performing the various behaviors in his repertory—preferences and aversions that are not contingent on the other person’s behavior. By itself, as a pure state of total independence, BRC would develop in any environment in which each of two parties can find something he prefers to do and something he prefers not to do without affecting or being affected by the other. The requirements would appear to be resources adequate for self-sufficiency and barriers to communication, such as physical space or self-absorption. The component of mutual fate control is produced by each person’s preferences and aversions for the various behaviors in the other person’s repertory—preferences and aversions that are not contingent on variaANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX tions in his own behavior. Each person can control unconditionally the outcomes of the other and is indifferent in regard to helping or hurting. Pure MFC thus would require an environment in which each controls a different set of resources that are rewarding and/or costly to the other and which are neither rewarding nor costly to himself. The component of mutual behavior control appears when behaviors are selectively interfered with or facilitated by actions of the partner. The consequences of such interference and facilitation produce the BC pattern of rewards and costs. In general—and to oversimplify—interference creates costs and facilitation heightens rewards. Interference is produced by response incompatibility. Responses are incompatible because they simply cannot be performed simultaneously or because they do not in some sense fit together—they create incongruity when performed simultaneously. The inability to perform both behaviors simultaneously often derives from some spatial restriction or scarcity. Two persons cannot depart simultaneously from a room because the exit is too small. In this case the restriction is purely physical. In other cases the scarcity is imposed by a social rule: two persons cannot simultaneously become president of the local Kiwanis Club because a rule restricts the number of incumbents to one. (In these two examples it must be assumed that neither person has a preference for going first: whether exiting first or second or being the first or second president.) The effects of incongruity on interference are probably largely psychological. In Braithwaite’s (1955) example, when Luke plays classical piano while Matthew improvizes jazz on the trumpet, the cacophony is costly to both: it is harder to play and harder to listen. If the incongruity is created by the expression of conflicting opinions voiced on the same occasion by two persons, the interference effects may be reflected in the discomfort or anxiety occasioned by the dissensus. (Again, for the latter example to reflect pure MBC it is necessary to assume that the persons do not care which opinions they voice so long as they are not different.) Another source of incongruity has been pointed out by Foa and Foa (1975) in their discussion of the exchange of different kinds of resource. Although it is entirely appropriate (to say the least) to pay for one’s meal at a restaurant, the guest who has been invited to a private home for dinner is expected to depart from the occasion by thanking the hostess and expressing his admiration for her culinary skills; that is, by giving love and status. If, instead, he left a tip and attempted to pay the bill, the embarrassment of the hostess would no doubt be made apparent to him. The interference created by the incongruity between the loving care of the hostess and the guest’s commercial response to it would be experienced by both. The general point is that the outcome pattern characteristic of MBC may reflect the socially, defined appropriateness or inappropriateness of various combinations of actions. Qualitative differences in rewards may be identified on the basis of the particular actions or other rewards to which they are most appropriate. Probably no particular rewarding action has the same value, regardless of what the partner does. Even social approval, one of the most generally rewarding actions, suffers in value if the recipient’s behavior clearly does not warrant it. One meaning of “economic” transaction is that the resources have fixed inherent values that do not depend on what the partner does (the nature of the “goods” he provides). The MBC pattern generated by considerations of appropriateness is more characteristic of social and affectional exchange. Response facilitation involves not merely the absence of interference. It may produce a decrement in the costs of producing the behaviors or an increment in their consummatory appreciation. If Luke and Matthew can both play and enjoy jazz, their ensemble playing—whatever the costs—may be an agreeable improvement on the sounds of their solo improvisations. (For this situation to generate pure MBC it must be assumed that they derive as much pleasure when neither plays as when both do.) In this example the efforts to synchronize may impose costs on them; the facilitation occurs only at the level of rewards. Facilitative cost cutting may occur in other settings; for example, when the pooled synchronous efforts of two persons (in building a house, pulling a load) make the task easier for each. A reduction in the costs of making the response and an increase in the rewards for having done so may occur when on the same occasion two persons express similar mutually supportive opinions. (For further elaboration of interference and facilitation see Thibaut and Kelley, 1959, Chapter 4.) As we noted in Chapter 2, many of the natural social—-psychological components of interdependence are more complex than the simple mathematical components. This is reflected in several of the parenthetical qualifying remarks in the preceding paragraphs. When Luke and Matthew find that their ensemble jazz playing is better than the solos of either one, the pattern is pure MBC only if they also derive equal net satisfaction when neither plays. A more common version of this situation is shown in the conjunctive pattern in Figure 3.1, where the rewards are derived only when both play. A noncorrespondent version of the conjunctive pattern is the “turn-taking” game in Figure 3.1. Luke may prefer that both play and Matthew, that neither play. In each case the reward for each person requires that both persons make a certain response. The turn-taking game is generated by spatial restriction or scarcity (as in the examples of leaving an area through a narrow exit or attaining the club ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX presidency) plus preferences regarding which person takes which action (leaves or becomes president). (In terms of the analysis of Chapter 2 these particular patterns involve all three simple mathematical components, combined in equal proportions.) The “complement” of the conjunctive pattern is the disjunctive one (Figure 3.1) in which rewards are high (or costs low) if either person makes the appropriate response. Put another way, the low outcomes are received only if both persons act improperly. This pattern often reflects an intersubstitutability between the actions of the two persons, as in Deutsch’s cooperation condition in which the entire group is graded well if any of the members attain a good problem solution (1949). Luke Plays Doesn’t play Plays Matthew Doesn't play Conjunctive pattern Turn—taking pattern Disjunctive pattern a Figure 3.1 Conjunctive and disjunctive patterns characteristic of “natural” components. ANTECEDENTS OF CORRESPONDENCE The discussion of correspondence in Chapter 2 suggested that this property of interdependence is determined by the degree of correspondence in the MBC component, by the concordant or discordant relations between the BRC and MFC terms, and by the concordance of MBC with either BRC or MFC. The correspondence or noncorrespondence of a matrix relates to the amount of conflict the pair will experience. The analysis thus points to several different sources of conflict and suggests new ways of looking at the determinants of compatibility or incompatibility between two persons. As the reader will anticipate, the factors contributing to correspondence or noncorrespondence define different respects in which psychologically the two persons are similar or dissimilar and complementary or anticomplementary. Correspondent versus Noncorrespondent MBC The dyadic pattern of correspondent MBC results when the two persons are affected in the same way by facilitation and /or interference. In some cases both persons have the same behavioral choices, as in the example of Luke and Matthew (Figure 3.1), each of whom had to decide whether to play his instrument. In these cases the symmetry of effect constituting correspondence may reflect either mutual preferences for similar behavior or mutual preferences for different behaviors. Thus both correspondent MBC matrices in Figure 3.2 show that persons A and B are facilitated and/or interfered with by each other’s behavior in the same way, but in the left matrix this symmetry results from a mutual preference for similar behaviors and in the matrix on the right, from a mutual preference for different or complementary behaviors. To suggest some examples, in the left matrix C versus D might refer, respectively, to (a) reading versus watching TV (in a small apartment), (b) talking versus being contemplative, (c) discussing politics versus discussing art, or (d) playing classical music versus jazz (as in the earlier example). In the right matrix, in which similar behaviors are mutually interfering and/or different ones are facilitative, C versus D might refer, respectively, to (a) going first versus second through a narrow doorway, (b) taking the initiative versus being submissive, or (c) talking versus listening (ina fine-grain analysis of conversation). Of course, we must assume in all the foregoing examples Similar Different Figure 3.2 Correspondent MBC involving similar or different behaviors. ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX for both matrices that there is no unconditional (RC) preference for either of the two actions; for example, talking versus listening. Noncorrespondent MBC results from asymmetry of interference or facilitation. As shown in Figure 3.3, behavioral combinations that are facilitative for one person are interfering for the other and vice versa; for example, A andB might bea teenage boy and girl on their first date and 1 and 2 might correspond to the benches on the two sides of a table in a rear booth at the soda fountain. The boy, A, having an interest in hugging and physical contact, prefers them to sit on the same bench and doesn’t care which. The girl, B, interested in conversation and finding out more about this fellow, prefers them to set on opposite sides of the table. (The reader can easily imagine that with similar interests both would prefer either the same bench or opposite ones.) The asymmetry here derives from the different goals the two have with respect to their interaction. A similar example might be provided by Braithwaite’s musicians, both of whom can play either piano or strings. Person A (Luke) enjoys it when both play piano (behavior 1 in Figure 3.3) and he also enjoys their both playing strings (behavior 2). Person B (Matthew) is presently studying music in which a piano accompaniment is provided for a string instrument. Hence he tries to play piano (behavior 1) when A is playing the violin and tries to play the violin (behavior 2) when A is playing the piano. Sometimes, however, Matthew misjudges and finds that he is playing the same instrument as Luke. The same outcome pattern would emerge if Matthew were trying to have an interesting debate on the merits of two political candidates and Luke’s intention was to reach consensus on one or the other. Matthew would be pleased when he succeeded in disagreeing with Luke but sometimes would miscalculate and find himself agreeing (or perhaps be reluctantly forced to agree by the weight of evidence.) Noncorrespondence also stems from individual and cultural differences in preferences for similarity versus difference. Suppose that individuals vary in their preferences for discrepancy between their own and other persons’ opinions. In the extreme case one person would prefer Figure 3.3 Noncorrespondent MBC. the expression of similar opinions and the other, the expression of different opinions, the resulting matrix (for the expression of attitudes on a given issue) being one of high noncorrespondence. As the last example suggests, this might reflect different motives—one person seeking opinion validation and the other, a stimulating exchange of ideas. (It should also be noted that the expression of attitudes generally involves RC and FC components inasmuch as most persons have certain attitude positions they prefer to state and to hear stated.) Cultural differences in preferred interaction distances would also generate a noncorrespondent MBC pattern, similar to that described for the teenagers on their first date. Neither person cares just where the interaction is but one prefers closeness (the same spot) and the other, distance (different spots). These differences do not reflect different motives but rather different interaction habits that are facilitated or interfered with by different sets of cues. Concordance between BRC and MFC Whereas the crucial factor in the preceding discussion is whether the two persons are affected in the same or different ways by combinations of their actions, here the central question is whether they are affected in the same or different ways by their respective actions considered singly. Each of the two persons may have preferences about what he and the other person does. If each person wants to do what the other wants him to do, BRC and MFC are concordant. This may be true for reasons of reward or cost factors or both. (In the following examples to simplify the story we speak of the concordance resulting from both persons’ preference for the behavior of only one of the pair.) Both A and B may get reward from A’s behavior 1; or A may get reward from it whereas B avoids the costs produced by behavior 2; or both may find the costs of behavior 1 to be lower than if A performs behavior 2; and so on. In the case of moderate concordance (i.e., concordance generating moderate correspondence) A prefers to some degree to do what B prefers very strongly; for high concordance both have preferences of similar strength regarding A’s behavior. Socially and psychologically, this concordance can be traced to learning conditions that result in a person performing, at low cost and/or high direct gratification, actions that other persons value. In the extreme case the person finds joy in the very activities that help or please others. This would be illustrated by the story teller who enjoys his own stories and who pleases his audience, the parent who takes pleasure in building the treehouse that the child wants, or who enjoys making clothes that the offspring enjoys wearing. In most such instances the actor would also get ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX rewards from the other person’s responses to his help or even from the knowledge that the other person is pleased (which would involve a value transformation, Chapter 7), but we mean here to emphasize the direct satisfaction the actor gains from the behavior that the other enjoys. The case in which the costs of behaving in the manner the partner prefers are lower than the costs of alternative behaviors might be illustrated by the exchange of favorable evaluations. Under certain conditions, for example, when each person’s behavior is within the general zone of acceptability, to be critical or even to say nothing might be more costly than to be complimentary. If each is pleased by receiving the other's compliments, then this pleasure is concordant with the cost-savings aspects of delivering the compliment. Concordance derived from mutual cost reduction might occur for a pair of recently introduced persons, neither of whom is yet ready to discuss personal matters. For cost-cutting reasons each would prefer not only to talk about other matters himself but also to have his partner speak of other matters. The discordant relations between BRC and MFC reflect a conflict between what the person prefers to do and what his partner wishes him to do. The action desired by the partner (for reasons of reward attainment or cost avoidance) is either less rewarding for the actor than the alternative action or more costly. If we focus on the costs for the actor (or the rewards he forgoes) in completing the “helpful’’ action, the BRC-MFC discordance represents the essential condition of social exchange. Exchange implies giving up something in exchange for receiving something. Although one may speak of “exchange” in the concordant case, in which each « one directly appreciates what the other also prefers, exchange is not necessary for the relation to have benefits for both. The dependence may be unilateral, as with the story teller or helper in the concordant examples given above. In contrast, with discordance an exchange is necessary if there is to be mutual satisfaction. Each person produces at some cost to himself an action that is valuable to the other. For the exchange to be mutually profitable the costs to self must be lower than the rewards to the partner. Thus true social exchange occurs when the MFC component is more important than the BRC component with which it is discordantly associated. (When the two components are equal in magnitude, a strict conflict of interest obtains.) The reader will think of numerous examples of exchange with discordant MFC and BRC. Youngsters can trade baseball cards when each has a card that costs less to give up than it is worth to the partner. (Although this may seem to imply an interpersonal comparison of costs and rewards, no such implication is necessary. Exchange will occur if each child makes the judgment that he prefers the other’s card to his own. Thus only intrapersonal comparison is involved.) Exchange may be based on complementary skills, for example, when both persons desire both products 1 and 2 but A is more skillful at fabricating product 1 and B is more skillful with product 2. Mutual interest in cost cutting provides the basis for specialization of production activities. The analysis of Foa and Foa (1975) implies that RC’s concordance or discordance with FC depends on the nature of the resource that is being exchanged. The implication is that discordance increases to the degree that giving up a resource depletes the giver’s supply of that resource. If the act of giving does not diminish the giver’s supply of the resource, the FC-RC relationship will be neither concordant nor discordant, as in giving information to another (although the costs of communicating the information may contribute some discordance). The components will be concordantly related if the act of giving increases own outcomes, as in the giving of love. For two lovers in sexual embrace, to use an example from Foa and Foa, the BRC is concordant with the MFC. Concordance between BRC and MBC Both this and the MFC-MBC concordance reflect no simple similarities or differences between the two persons but rather the relation of the convergence between their respective RCs (or FCs) to the coordination requirements of their MBC matrix. Concordant BRC and MBC reflects the situation in which, when each person takes his most preferred action, the pair is brought to a cell that is rewarding from the point of view of behavioral facilitation. Two cases can be distinguished, depending on whether their MBC component requires similar or different behaviors. In the first case concordance would require that the two persons prefer the same action; for example, in our earlier example of the activities of a husband and wife at 5:00 pm the mutual preference for acting together would have been promoted by their preferring, in terms of direct rewards, the same activity, either drinking or cycling. If the MBC coordination requires different actions, then different reflexive preferences are concordant; for example, if for its most effective performance a task requires that one person take the initiative and the other follow, the necessary coordination is achieved by two persons whose preferences regarding, their own dominance or submission are different. Another example is provided by the two persons at the start of an automobile trip. Person A prefers to drive and person B prefers being the passenger. The coordination requirements of the task are thus satisfied by their divergent preferences. (The more distal antecedent of this coordination requirement is, of course, the decision of the automobile designer who provided ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX only one driver’s seat. The designer, in turn, was responding to certain obvious physical and psychological facts relating to the human control of machines.) These examples make clear that similarity in reflexive preferences promotes certain types of coordination but a complementary difference in such preferences promotes other types. In both cases the concordance reflects the fact that the preferences of the two persons for their own behaviors are such, either similar or different, that they readily satisfy coordination requirements. If in the discordant case both persons follow their preferences with regard to their own behavior, they act jointly in a manner that fails to satisfy their preferences regarding combinations of their behavior. It is necessary for one person to override his reflexive control if the benefits of coordination are to be realized. Again two kinds of discordance can be distinguished: (a) the MBC requires the same behavior of each but each prefers different ones, and (b) the MBC requires different behaviors but each prefers the same one. Concordance between MFC and MBC Here the ruling factor is the meshing between the mutually beneficent exercise of fate control and the MBC coordination requirements. Discord is illustrated by the game known as the Battle of the Sexes in which, for example, each person wants the partner to do a different thing (the wife wants the husband to dress ina ‘‘mod” fashion and he wants her to dress conservatively), but the rewards are highest when their behaviors are similar (they appear well together with a similar mode of dress, whichever one it is). Again, this case, in which the different desires for the partner’s behavior conflict with MBC requirements of similarity, can be distinguished from the case in which similar desires for the partner’s behavior conflict with MBC requirements of difference; for example, ina mismatched couple each desires submissiveness from the partner, but their tasks are predominantly those that require a pairing of leadership with followership. The game known as Chicken involves a similar discordance: each person has a strong preference for the other one to back down. This makes difficult the coordination on different behaviors that is specified by the MBC component of the game. Concordance is present when what the two persons want of each other is consistent with what they want in the way of joint behavior. Their desires for the same behavior from each other may be concordant with MBC coordination that requires matching behavior or their desires for different behavior from each other may be concordant with a coordination requiring complementary actions. As an example of the latter consider A and B, both of whom can play trumpet and piano with equal facility and enjoyment. If their ensemble playing sounds better when one (no matter which) plays the piano and the other, the trumpet, this advantage will be concordant with A’s liking to hear B on piano and B’s liking to hear A on trumpet. Similarity versus Complementarity In many of the preceding examples it has been reasonable to assume that the behavioral alternatives are identical for the two persons. Under these circumstances we have seen that correspondence can reflect either similarity or complementarity between the two persons; for example, although both matrices presented in Figure 3.2 describe correspondent coordination problems, in the one case, if the behavioral choices are the same for A and B, they must enact similar behaviors, whereas in the other they must enact different ones. As summarized in Figure 3.4, the same distinction can be made with respect to each of the concordances relevant to the degree of correspondence of the relationship. This figure describes the circumstances and preferences that must exist if each of the four factors contributing to correspondence is to reflect a case of similarity or complementarity. The matrix analysis is indifferent to the distinction between similarity and complementarity, being sensitive only to differences in pattern that Figure 3.4 General antecedents of outcome—correspondent types of interdependence. Similarity Complementarity Correspondent MBC _ Similar behaviors produce Different behaviors produce coordination. Similar behaviors coordination. Dissimilar are symmetrically facilitative behaviors are symmetrically and/or dissimilar behaviors are facilitative and/or similar symmetrically interfering. behaviors are symmetrically interfering Concordant BRC and _ Each prefers to perform the Each prefers to perform a MFC same behavior and this is the different behavior and this is behavior the other prefers him _ the behavior the other prefers to perform. him to perform. Concordant BRC and_ Each prefers to perform the Each prefers to perform the MBC similar behavior that produces _ dissimilar behavior that coordination. produces coordination. Concordant MFC and_ Each prefers the other to Each prefers the other to MBC perform the same behavior perform a different behavior and these similar behaviors and the dissimilar behaviors produce coordination. produce coordination. ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX are not attributable to a particular identification or labeling of the behavioral alternatives available to each person. The distinction, however, is an important one for the application of the analysis to social psychological problems; for example, it seems probable that similarity or matching MBC requirements are easier to identify and learn than the complementary. The similarity requirements may also in general be easier to manage on the spur of the moment; it is usually easier for one person to imitate the other than to complement his action (as by doing the opposite or making a compensatory adjustment.) Some of the common complementary MBC problems are handled by rules that constrain all interactions to one of the two +, + cells (e.g., rules of the road: driving on the right side of the road and yielding right of way at an intersection to a vehicle on one’s right). In exchanges involving BRC and MFC the similarity pattern requires not only that A derive direct reward (or cost cutting) from his own performance of a given behavior but also that he gain additional benefits from the same behavior in B. This is often characteristic of social activities among peers such as singing and telling stories. Complementarity in the BRC and MFC combinations is more common in role-differentiated relationships such as a husband-—wife pair; for example, according to stereotyped role conceptions, he prefers to take out the garbage and have her wash the dishes and she prefers to wash the dishes and have him take out the garbage. Many relationships cannot be characterized in terms of similarity versus complementarity because the two persons’ behavioral choices are not the same. Consider, for example, the PD game. (Although this involves discordant rather than concordant BRC and MFC, the discordant BRC is not so great that it precludes a mutually rewarding exchange.) In the experimental version each person has the same choice between the C and D responses. Perhaps the most common close parallel in real life is the relation between two sellers of a given product to the same set of buyers. Under certain conditions of demand their respective decisions to set a high or low price (each one facing the same choice) yield outcomes corresponding to the PD pattern. Probably more common examples of the pattern in economic exchange are those in which different behavioral alternatives exist for the two persons: buyers and sellers exchanging goods and services, different goods, services for money, and so on. ANTECEDENTS OF COMPONENT WEIGHTS To repeat, when more than one component is involved in an interdependent relationship, they may, be combined concordantly or discordantly—and the psychological antecedents of the paired components will differ accordingly. In addition, as described in Chapter 4, it is necessary to take into account the relative weights of the associated components. Thus true “social exchange” occurs only when the MFC term is larger than the BRC term with which it is discordantly paired. We now turn to a discussion of the antecedents of differently weighted combinations of the paired components. MFC > BRC. As inall unequally weighted pairings, the inequality can result from one component's being very large or from the other’s being very small (or for both reasons). In the discordant case that produces “social exchange’ each person can at small cost to himself greatly advantage the other. In the earlier example of trading baseball cards it might be assumed that a boy with duplicate cards will not greatly hesitate to exchange one of his duplicates for a card that he has not yet acquired. More generally, this trading relationship might be expected to develop when each has a relatively large supply of a different resource that the other strongly values. It may also develop when two persons are differentially skillful at providing two services or goods that both of them value. The skills of each make the costs of providing a particular reward less than its value to the partner. This pattern of discordance is exemplified by the Prisoner’s Dilemma game. In the concordant case each has only a slight preference to do what the other strongly wants him to do. The Matthew-Luke duo remains intact because each greatly enjoys hearing the other play, although neither receives more than slight pleasure from his own performance. (This pattern of concordance is illustrated by the Maximizing Difference game; see Chapter 4.) BRC >MFC. In this combination preferences about own behavior are more important than those concerning the behavior of the other. In the discordant pairing each strongly prefers not to do what the other slightly prefers him to do. This might be exemplified by the strained relations between two diplomats from rival countries: each finds it personally quite costly to give the other the compliment each mildly feels he deserves out of respect for diplomatic protocol. A general case would be an attempt by two persons to exchange different resources, each giving something of which he has a smaller supply than his partner; or they might attempt to exchange mutually valued services that neither one is expert in performing, the costs being too high to be offset by the reward value to the partner. The concordant case implies that each strongly prefers to do what the other only slightly prefers him to do. Thus Luke and Matthew may ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX strongly prefer to play the guitar (rather than, say, being quiet) but experience only a marginal increase in pleasure from one another's playing. MBC > BRC. _ In general, coordination is more important than reflexive preferences. In the discordant case two behaviors meet the strong coordination requirement, but both persons are somewhat inclined to prefer the behavior that leads to incoordination. In the example of the automobile trip both persons may mildly prefer to be the driver or both may have inclinations to be passengers. In the concordant case again two behaviors meet the strong coordination requirements, but the behaviors are so similar that there is little basis for personal preference (as in sitting on one or the other end of a teetertotter). If the behaviors are quite different, the persons’ preferences for them are weak: one weakly prefers to drive the car and the other mildly likes being a passenger. BRC >MBC. Now, coordination becomes less important than preferences about own behavior. In the discordant case the two behaviors or roles that satisfy the weak coordination requirement are so strongly relevant to the persons’ needs or abilities that each strongly prefers to perform the behavior leading to incoordination. If the two persons in the example of the activities of husband and wife at 5:00 p.m. (Chapter 2) have strong and different preferences for the two activities of drinking and cycling, they will not meet the coordination requirement (weak in this version of the example) of doing things together. The concordant case is similar except that the strong preferences for own behavior lead to satisfaction of a weak coordination requirement. Both husband and wife prefer martinis to bicycles and enjoy martinis even (somewhat) more when together. MBC >MFC. Here, in general, coordination is more’important than preferences about the other’s behavior. (Battle of the Sexes, Chapter 4, exemplifies the discordant version of this unequally weighted combination of MBC and MFC.) In the example of the automobile trip there is a strong coordination requirement that one drive and one “ride.” Although neither person has a preference with regard to his or her own driving or sitting, the discordant case is produced if each is slightly afraid of the other’s driving. Concordance occurs when both persons have mild preferences for the other’s behavior that lead to meeting a strong coordination requirement. Two musicians sound much better when one plays trumpet and the other, piano. Both play trumpet and piano with equal facility and enjoyment butA mildly prefers to hear B on trumpet and B has an equally small but real preference to hear A on piano. MFC >MBC. The coordination requirement is relaxed. Discordance is well illustrated by the game of “Chicken” for this unequally weighted combination. Each person in the game has a strong preference for the other one to back down, such preference outweighing the coordination requirement. The concordant case is realized when strong preferences for particular behaviors from each other support the weak coordination requirement. Two musicians sound somewhat better when one plays trumpet and the other plays piano, and A strongly prefers to hear B on trumpet, whereas B strongly prefers to hear A on piano. ANTECEDENTS OF THE GRAND MEANS We assume that each person scales his outcomes in relation to a comparison level (CL). (In Chapter 6 we consider the consequences of possible nonlinear effects in this scaling.) Therefore the average level of each person’s outcomes in the matrix (his GM) reflects the magnitudes of the rewards to be enjoyed and costs to be incurred in relation to his CL. As described more fully in Thibaut and Kelley (1959), the CL is the level of outcomes the person feels he deserves on the basis of his experience in other similar relationships and his understanding of the satisfaction persons in such relationships should and do enjoy. The outcomes in the particular matrix are positive if above CL and negative if below it, the person being satisfied or dissatisfied, respectively. His GM does not, of course, necessarily reflect the level of outcomes the person typically attains within the dyad. If the pattern is sufficiently correspondent and if the two persons succeed in attaining the high outcomes and avoiding the low, each person’s outcomes may be considerably higher than his GM. Alternatively, if the two persons become trapped in a cell with low outcomes, their outcomes may be considerably lower than their GMs. (The superiority of the attained outcomes relative to the GMs might be used as an indicator of the efficiency of the dyad.) To simplify the following discussion, however, we assume that the attained level of outcomes for each person is approximately equal to his GM in the matrix. Assume, then, that the GM reflects the person’s general level of satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the interaction summarized by the interdependence matrix. Would a person continue interaction if his outcomes were generally negative? The answer is found in the nature of his alternatives to the present interaction. The specific matrix may be only part of the total dyadic relationship, and one person may accept negative outcomes in it as part of an extended trading process in which they are offset ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX by positive outcomes in other domains of the relationship. (In this case we might wish to expand the matrix to incorporate all the significant parts of the relationship, the positive as well as the negative.) If the person’s outcomes within the total realm of the dyadic interaction are generally negative and if, nevertheless, he continues the interaction, itis presumed that his alternatives to being in this dyad are even worse. More generally, each person is assumed to have a comparison level for alternatives (CL,,,) for each relationship. This is the level of outcomes he believes he can obtain from interactions and activities (including solitary ones) that are available to him as alternatives to the present interaction. When outcomes in the latter drop below the CL,),, he (sooner or later) leaves it and moves to his alternatives. According to this logic, if he believes those alternatives to yield poorer outcomes than the present relationship, he will remain in it even if it is not producing outcomes he regards, in relation to the CL, as satisfactory. The antecedents of this situation, in which his GM is negative, are found in experiences and conditions that produce a gap between his CL and his CL,;,. In one common case more attractive relationships are highly salient for him and his CL is high. However, he is required to remain in the present less rewarding relationship because the social, emotional, or legal costs entailed in moving to the better alternatives are too high (his CL,), is low). This is an appropriate place to consider the interdependence implications of the GMs and CL,,,s of the two persons. Any relationship can be considered in terms of the behavior alternatives shown in Figure 3.5, in which each person’s choice is between being inside or outside the relationship. ‘In’ refers to being oriented to the dyad—desiring to continue (or resume) it. ‘““Out’’ refers to moving into the best available alternative relationship. When both persons choose “‘in,”” they interact within the dyad and each person receives a level of outcomes we assume (see before) to be approximately equal to his GM. When either person chooses “out” (i.e., to leave this dyad and pursue his alternative sources of reward), he moves to the level of outcomes represented by his CL,),. Figure 3.5 The interdependence pattern for being inside or outside a relationship. When one person chooses “out” and the other chooses “in,” the latter is cast into a state of limbo. Because the relationship does not exist and interaction cannot take place unless both persons are ‘‘in,” he is caught somewhere between the dyad and his alternative. The question mark for his outcomes reflect uncertainty about the consequences of this inbetween status. It is probably less satisfactory than the CL,), (as indicated by the connotations of unrequited love and rejected offer of friendship) and the person will probably eventually move to his alternative. The in-out cell is probably also somewhat uncomfortable for the person who is ‘‘out’’—if he or she knows that the partner desires to resume the relationship. (If the person is completely “out,” the partner’s orientation may not be apparent.) In sum, the pattern of outcomes for an ongoing relationship is probably similar to one of the two patterns in Figure 3.6. Case I illustrates symmetrical dependence. A person’s dependence is a function of how much his GM exceeds his CL,,,. In Case I the two persons are equally dependent on the existence of their relationship. The components of the interdependence are primarily MBC—each person wanting to match the partner’s “in” or ‘‘out’’ choice—and MFC—each one wanting the partner to be “in” rather than “out.” In Case II B’s dependence is far greater than A’s. According to the principle of least interest, A can be expected to exercise greater power within the relationship than B: “That person is able to dictate the conditions of association whose interest in the continuation of the affair is least’’ (Waller and Hill, 1951, p. 191). As we show in Chapter 10, A’s high CL,;, (high in relation to his outcomes in the A-B dyad) affords him a bargaining position from which he can make a strong case for receiving his higher outcomes within the relationship; that is, among the pairs of outcomes available within the A-B dyad (which are summarized by the two GMs), A can lay claim to those that yield his higher outcomes even if they happen to yield B rather low ones. Up toa point (at which he is not realizing the good outcomes reflected in GM , Case I Case II A A In Out Figure 3.6 Typical outcome patterns for the in/out choice matrix. ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX and is being pushed too close to his CL,,,), B will be willing to honor A’s claims in order to ensure the continuation of the dyad. The antecedents of dependence are, of course, found in conditions that result in high rewards being uniquely available in the particular relationship. Individuals whose personal properties (e.g., attractiveness, skills) enable them to attain good outcomes ina number of different dyads are not greatly dependent on any given dyad. A person who derives a highly unique kind of satisfaction from the partner and who therefore finds the partner irreplaceable is, of course, highly dependent on that partner. Two persons who manage to please each other in ways they have never experienced with other partners and do not expect in other relationships have the basis for strong mutual dependence. Social and personal rules that delimit certain highly rewarding activities (e.g., sex, personal intimacies) to a given dyad serve to heighten and maintain the interdependence of that dyad. ts wets § S i a r H “eth anos Bi te ied i epee if trey iagha 4 antien eee ee HIV als, ease cua inl itera aVioowel ae Vit} of/ arf ee oun vias eds paris. es wey one ei (eden ef ub isnivicnedthh. ee a ei. . ta apy’ Avid aythyber, pra a et papas pvesys tt adler une whiny ph tebe! Oi fare Lobia Teg teow lin ete tera bine aid weit sheet pes te O ofttg parry eas aroha 7 Hapa, i aes 2oers ath oi ary ww) Tee as j feet Ue yet te aeeg Die a yeti iene eet a ra Se on chy) ae ex aaa bing ifcor Sapte egy sshonit eed aay ve eet he hi 40d) Sash OE eS ne egal Ws ie h (4G ve en de belly W va = i aa OE t j yl —* Ve MV P Sy sf F Ole, a s er ri ky Uh a i

