The Domain of 2 X 2 Matrices Strategies for Exploring the Domain, Properties of the Domain, Distribution of Matrices, Two-Outcome-Level Matrices, The Rapoport and Guyer Matrices, Outlines of the Domain, Patterns Based on Symmetric Components, Combinations of MFC and MBC, Combinations of BRC and MBC, Combinations of BRC and MFC, Combinations of All Three Components, Social Psychological Significance, 102 Prior Research, 106 Salient Matrices, 109 epee: 6 dint dP Mev haan lop Vo 4érmitel ns Orth Penlp t apt? sift Iogear steer qe silageeyy) ee mew a ” isl Mitte Awe i M4 hae De ten - i To ee aul doy a5 i ser yon y rin A by os a P et oe Pgs yagi he wi ave “—s le ABSTRACT This chapter considers the various possible patterns of the simplest matrix (the 2 x2) and the principal properties of the total domain of such matrices. They are classified with respect to four properties: (a) mutuality of dependence, (b) degree of dependence, (c) bases of dependence, and (d) correspondence of outcomes. Variations in the last property, which reflects commonality versus conflict of interest, are shown to depend in important ways on combinations of the first three properties. Various important patterns and common “‘games”’ are identified and located within the domain and in relation to one another. Although it is not possible to consider every possible matrix, the analysis of matrices into components (as described in Chapter 2) and the relation of these components to properties of the domain give confidence in the comprehensiveness of the exploration. In this chapter we consider the different patterns of interdependence that are generated by the many possible combinations of components as they vary in their relative magnitudes and in their correspondence and concordant—discordant orientations. For practical purposes we limit our exploration to 2 x 2 matrices. As noted in Chapter 2, the analysis of components and patterns applies equally to the given and the effective matrix of interdependence. Thus the taxonomy of patterns presented here could be used for classifying a set of given or a set of effective matrices. In Chapter 7 we use the present taxonomy as a basis for identifying the main examples of given matrices that have certain properties. We examine them systematically for what they imply to be functionally useful transformations of the given matrix into the effective one. The present classification system gives us assurance at that crucial point that our sample of matrices is comprehensive and consequently that our analysis is well founded. The major purpose of our exploration of the 2 x 2 domain is to identify the properties or dimensions with respect to which interdependence patterns differ. These will provide us with a framework for locating patterns relative to one another and for imposing a rough classification on them. At the conclusion of this effort we will have an understanding of the attribute space” that characterizes interdependent relationships and this in turn can be examined in relation to the classification of relationships provided by other theoretical perspectives or by analyses of the layman’s perception of social relationships. In Chapter 5 we analyze the major properties more systematically, suggest quantitative indices for them, and determine exactly how they relate to the components and their intermeshing. Beyond our special purposes in exploring the domain of 2 x 2 matrices, the reader will find this chapter useful in calling his attention to various important patterns that, because of their special properties, he may wish to remember. There is, of course, an infinite number of patterns. Within this universe, however, there is a limited number of noteworthy patterns—some 20 or 30. These patterns are special for different reasons—some because of their simplicity, others because of a property they represent in an extreme degree, and others because they face the interdependent person with sharp dilemmas of choice. STRATEGIES FOR EXPLORING THE DOMAIN In principle, all possible patterns of interdependence can be constructed by combining the three components in all possible sets of magnitudes and concordances. In practice, the number of matrices generated in this manner is endless and, because they vary continuously rather than discretely, the task of distinguishing among them becomes difficult. An alternative approach is to consider the domain of all possible patterns as a large terrain to be explored while the salient features and landmarks along the particular trails followed are noted. Because we can select these trails in a systematic manner (by selecting certain discrete values of the components) and because the terrain has regular features (due to its combinatorial genesis), we can more or less fill in the unexplored portions of the map by extrapolation from our limited observations. There are, however, a number of ways to explore the domain and, as we show, what one discovers on his journeys depends on the particular constraints he places on his search process. Rapoport and Guyer (1966) restricted their analysis of 2. x 2 matrices to those in which each person's four outcomes are completely ranked, the most desirable having a value of 4, the second most desirable, a value of 3, and the least desirable, a value of 1. Then all possible configurations of such matrices were identified and the 78 unique configurations were classified. Whereas the Rapoport and Guyer procedure distinguishes four levels of outcome for each person and requires that each level occur DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES only once in the matrix, we begin with a simpler approach in which we distinguish only two levels of outcome for each person, that is, high and low, and then identify all their possible combinations and configurations; for example, we distinguish all the different patterns in which one person has two high and two low outcomes, the other person, one high and three low outcomes. A second strategy for identifying and classifying various matrices is provided by the component analysis. The general approach is to consider all possible combinations of components of various magnitudes and to combine them in all the different ways possible. Because of the extremely large number of possibilities, this is feasible only if certain constraints are placed on the sets of components chosen for combination. Later we consider patterns based on symmetric components. Components are symmetric when the two persons are subject to a given type of control, whether reflexive, fate, or behavior control, to the same degree. Several observations can be made about these two strategies for exploring the domain of matrices. First, the second strategy is the more general and subsumes the first under it. Thus the exploration of the matrices defined by various levels of outcome can be described in terms of combinations of particular values of the components; for example, by applying the component analysis to the Rapoport and Guyer matrices we find that very special sets of components are involved. (If the reader objects to applying the analysis of variance to the rank-ordered outcomes, he need only be reminded that we are doing this simply to characterize this particular set of matrices and to relate them to the larger universe of matrices.) The Rapoport and Guyer matrices are restricted to the sets in which each person has component weights of 2, 1, and 0, which are distributed in all possible ways over his RC, FC, and BC terms. The same observations can be made about the two-outcome-level matrices to be considered later. Identification of all possible patterns of two-outcome levels amounts to considering all possible combinations of certain sets of weights for the two persons. Second, the matrices one ‘’sees’’ in his exploration of the domain depend on the particular constraints he places on his exploration process; for example, because the Rapoport and Guyer strategy implicitly restricts our purview to patterns in which each person has weights 2, 1, and 0 distributed over his three components, it does not permit us to identify matrices such as pure MFC, pure MBC, the simple FC-BC pattern, or combinations of all three weighted equally. Similar limitations exist for the sample of two-outcome-level matrices. The sample does not include symmetrical component patterns found in the Rapoport and Guyer sample, such as those of PDG, Chicken, and Battle of the Sexes. The fact that the patterns of interdependence depend on the number of outcome levels distinguished has an interesting social-psychological implication; that is, the kinds of relationships interdependent persons experience will depend on how discriminating they are among their outcomes. Persons who, in 2 x 2 cases, distinguish only high and low levels, will never be faced with the subtleties of the Prisoner’s Dilemma or similar patterns requiring finer discriminations. This might be true for the infant who knows only that he is comfortable or uncomfortable or for the newcomer to a foreign country who, for reasons of language or cultural handicaps, can distinguish only that other persons are being friendly or unfriendly toward him. One might question the wisdom of considering matrices involving only gross distinctions in outcome (e.g., only high and low). It is not easy, however, to know how fine a scaling of outcomes the actors are capable of. This ability undoubtedly varies as a function of their experience, knowledge, freedom from time pressure, and the nature of the specific consequences represented in the matrix (their complexity and commensurability). In the absence of specific evidence on this point we believe it is desirable to conduct the analysis at different levels of fineness. Certainly, there is a strong esthetic appeal in the simplicity of the twooutcome-level analysis in which minimal assumptions are made about the valuational skills of the actors. For reasons implied—that we want to see all the major types of possible pattern including those available to highly discriminating persons as well as those who make only gross distinctions—we decided to use several different exploration strategies. PROPERTIES OF THE DOMAIN We have chosen to differentiate the various matrices on the basis of their properties—the configurations, patterns, and components they display. Although we often speculate about the behavioral consequences of different matrices, these comments are intended merely to suggest the social and behavioral implications of the matrix analysis. We have tried to avoid relying on such speculations as the basis for description and classification. This reliance seems to us to blur the distinction between the structure of interdependence and the interaction process of which structure is only a partial determinant. Our approach is to be contrasted with that of Rapoport and Guyer (1966). They analyzed the ranked-outcome patterns in terms of (a) what outcomes each person will receive as a consequence of their making DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES simultaneous and independent choices and (b) what a person who is not satisfied with the initial results can do, anticipating a second choice occasion, to improve his outcome. The assumptions concerning the basis of these choices follow those of game theory as closely as possible. Each person is assumed to have complete knowledge of the matrix. The criteria used in making the initial choices generally involve attempts to maximize one’s own outcomes. There is no assumption that the persons are able, on successive occasions, to work out collusive turntaking arrangements. As we detail in Chapter 6, such arrangements change the game and therefore are viewed from the game theoretical perspective as irrelevant to the characterization of a given pattern. In contrast, our general theoretical perspective is one of problem solving. Given matrices (given, in the technical sense defined in Chapter 1) are viewed as problems to be solved rather than as final, fixed causes of behavior. The problem-solving analogy implies that the reactions to a particular given matrix will be diverse, themselves characterized by pattern and structure, and even involving redefinitions of the problem. In the classic game theoretic view, illustrated by the Rapoport and Guyer analysis, the game matrix represents the final definition and distillation of the social situation to be used with narrow choice criteria in prescribing what each player should do. This meaning of the matrix corresponds to our conception of the effective matrix as being the definition of the relationship most closely linked to behavior. Because of our central interest in both given and effective matrices and in the links between them, we must characterize them in the same terms. This precludes classification in terms of their behavioral consequences and limits us to the use of matrix properties as such. * Excluding the case of perfect independence (the matrix of bilateral reflexive control), 2 x 2 matrices can be classified in terms of four major properties: (a) mutuality of dependence: whether there is mutual dependence (to be referred to as interdependence) or unilateral dependence (to be referred to simply as dependence); (b) degree of dependence: the degree to which the one or two persons are dependent on their partners; (c) bases of dependence: whether the dependence in the relationship involves fate control, behavior control, or some combination of the two; and (d) cor* Our use of the term behavior control to characterize a particular pattern in the matrix may seem inconsistent with this point. It implies a simple scenario of interaction, namely, if B is subject to BC and A varies his behavior, B is likely to vary his as well. However, we intend that the term simply refer to the fact that when A varies his behavior it is desirable for B to vary his also. Whether B does so is another matter, determined by other factors. In retrospect it might have been wise to adopt terms more descriptive of the matrix pattern thanare fate control and behavior control. It seemed simpler and we found it more natural to continue using those terms that we had adopted earlier (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). respondence of outcomes: degree to which the outcomes of the two persons are correspondent or noncorrespondent. Figure 4.1 presents a convenient way for locating matrices with respect to the first three of these four properties. It is, ina sense, our basic road map of the 2 x 2 domain. The central orienting point in Figure 4.1 is the state of independence. The matrix there is characterized by bilaterial reflexive control (BRC). Above this central point is the realm of interdependence. As we move upward, each person’s dependence increases so that patterns of total interdependence are at the top of the map. Along the first branch these are characterized by mutual fate control (MFC), along the third branch, by mutual behavior control (MBC), and along the second and fourth branches, by mixtures of fate control (FC) and behavior control (BC). Two kinds of mixture can be distinguished, namely, those at the end of the second branch in which each person is subject to both FC and BC and those at the end of the fourth, dotted branch in which one person (person A) is subject to FC and the other person (person B) is subject to BC. (Throughout what follows A is used to designate the person whose behavioral choices are represented by the columns of the matrix and B, the person whose choices are represented by the rows.) Intermediate degrees of interdependence, between the extremes of no interdependence at BRC or of complete interdependence at the top of the domain, are located at intermediate positions along the upward branches of the map. As we move upward along a branch the reflexive control is reduced for each person and replaced by FC, BC, or their combination, depending on the particular branch being followed. Other possible (FC, FC) (FC+BC, FC+BC) (BC, BC) Interdependence MFC MIXED MBC FC; BE Independence GR a a a a aa 4 Dependence FC, RC FC +BC, RC BC, RC Figure 4.1. Map of variations in dependence and bases of dependence. DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES branches, not shown, are intermediate between those in Figure 4.1. These would involve mixtures of FC and BC but with the predominant component being one or the other. To avoid confusion these and other intermediate branches of the map are omitted. The lower part of Figure 4.1 shows matrices of unilateral dependence. At the level of total dependence the dependent person (it will be person A) is subject wholly to FC, BC or some mixture of the two, but the partner (person B) is subject only to RC. Again, intermediate degrees of A’s dependence are located at intermediate positions along the appropriate branch. As we move downward from BRC, person A’s RC is reduced and replaced by FC, BC, or both, depending on the branch. Figure 4.1 provides a means of locating matrices with respect to mutuality, degree, and bases of dependence. The fourth property, correspondence of outcomes, can be plotted orthogonally to each branch of the figure. In this way we can see how variations in the degree and type of interdependence affect the degree of commonality of interest between the two persons. This is shown in Figure 4.2, which is explained in the following section. DISTRIBUTION OF MATRICES We now proceed to explore this domain of 2 x 2 matrices. We shall determine how the important fourth property of matrices, their correspondence or noncorrespondence, is related to the other properties. We first show the locations of various two-outcome-level (TOL) matrices and some of the ranked-outcome (RO) matrices classified by Rapoport and Guyer. These matrices, supplemented by other cases, will give us a view of the general outlines of the domain. Two-Outcome-Level Matrices It is possible to construct 30 different matrices by defining two outcome levels, high and low, for each person. Each person may have zero to four high outcomes ina2 X 2 matrix but the extreme cases, 0 and 4, are of no interest to us because the person’s outcome does not vary. Thus it is necessary to consider only those possible patterns in which each person has one, two, or three high outcomes. The reader can determine for himself that there are three different patterns in which each person has only one high outcome; six different patterns in which one has one high outcome and the other has two; four patterns with one and three, eight with two for each, six with two and three, and three with three for each. In developing these possibilities, it must be kept in mind that a pattern is unique only if it is not possible by relabeling the rows and/or columns or by interchanging the labeling of persons A and B to convert it into one of the other patterns in the set. (In practice, the process of identifying all the unique patterns by drawing up matrices and comparing them with others already identified is rather cumbersome and subject to error. One of the benefits of the component analysis is that it provides a more systematic and foolproof procedure for identifying all the possible matrices.) The locations of some of the two-outcome-level (TOL) patterns are indicated in Figure 4.2 by Ts. (The Rs in the figure indicate the locations of ranked-outcome matrices, discussed later.) Along each branch of the figure we have introduced correspondence of outcomes as an orthogonal variable. Patterns of extreme correspondence are located at the right edge of each small table and those of extreme noncorrespondence, at the left edge. Patterns in the center of each small table are characterized by neither correspondence nor noncorrespondence of outcomes. (Correspondence is indexed here according to the formula given in Chapter 5.) An extra small table at the top of Figure 4.2 displays the patterns of total interdependence. They have no RC for either person and reflect different combinations of FC and BC but are of special interest because of the high degree to which the two persons are interdependent. Twenty-two of the 30 possible TOL patterns are located at the 14 positions shown in Figure 4.2. (Several patterns are located at certain of the positions. Also, the reader will note that BRC is repeated in each small table, whenever appropriate.) Varying degrees of correspondence occur at most points in the domain; for example, four different degrees of correspondence are represented by the mixtures of FC and BC at the intermediate level of interdependence. The reason, of course, is that these components can vary in their concordance and, when MBC is involved, in correspondence. The remaining eight TOL patterns constitute mixtures of interdependence and dependence. All involve some asymmetry in dependence even though each person is, to some degree, dependent on the other. If the reader can imagine folding Figure 4.2 lengthwise along the horizontal line of independence, these eight patterns would be located at positions intermediate between the upper and lower levels of the fold. An examination of the distribution of the TOL matrices in Figure 4.2 shows that these simple matrices cover a considerable portion of the 2 X 2 domain. A good deal of the possible variety in patterning is captured by matrices in which only high versus low outcomes are distinguished. On the other hand, it is clear that some parts of the domain are not represented by TOL matrices. This is certainly true with respect to “UFPUIOP 94} UT SadTyeU SNOLIeA JO UOT}EIOY Z"p an B1q Ou ‘Og OY ‘Og+94 OY ‘Od fa aduapuadaq aduapuadapu] aduapuedapiaju| intermediate degrees of interdependence, which are represented among the TOL matrices only by patterns involving mixtures of FC and BC, and the same is true for intermediate degrees of dependence. The Rapoport and Guyer Matrices As noted earlier, in basing their taxonomy on matrices in which each person’s four outcomes are defined in terms of rank orders, Rapoport and Guyer limited themselves to matrices in which each person’s three component weights are in the ratio 2:1:0. This is without respect to order, so one person’s RC, FC, and BC component weights may be in the ratio 1:0:2, respectively, whereas another’s may be in the ratio 0:2:1. The component analysis affords a convenient method for determining how many such matrices there are and for generating a complete list of them. Seventy-eight different patterns can be generated with the 2:1:0 ratio of components. In Figure 4.2 Rs show the locations of 26 of the ranked-outcome (RO) patterns on our map of the 2 x 2 domain. (Two patterns are located at each of eight locations in the figure; therefore only 18 locations are indicated.) These 26 are the only ones among the 78 possible RO patterns that can be located directly on the branches of the domain. Because of the required ratio of the components, the remaining patterns fall either in the ‘fold’ between dependence and interdependence (48 patterns) or between the mixed and the FC, BC interdependence patterns. Thus there are no pure cases of unilateral dependence. With the 2:1:0 weights A may be totally dependent on B but the latter is always partly dependent on A. The only cases of mixed interdependence are those at the level of total interdependence. Mixtures at lower levels of interdependence require that all three components be greater than zero for both persons. Outlines of the Domain The locations of the TOL and RO patterns in Figure 4.2 begin to reveal the outlines of the2 x 2 domain; but even together they show only part of the picture. Using the components analysis, it is a simple matter to construct other matrices to fill out the gaps in Figure 4.2 and to determine their correspondence. The locations of these additional patterns are shown in Figure 4.2 by small circles. Figure 4.2 makes it clear that the entire range of correspondence—noncorrespondence does not occur at all points along the branches of the ‘“map” (i.e., for all combinations of mutuality, degree, and bases of dependence). Among the patterns of interdependence, in DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES the upper part of the figure, the maximum range occurs at intermediate degrees of interdependence when it is based on MFC but at maximum interdependence when it is based on MBC. Correspondence and noncorrespondence never become extreme when the interdependence is based on one person’s FC and the other’s BC. Among the dependent patterns correspondence is always neutral for the BC, RC combinations. The maximum range of correspondence—noncorrespondence occurs only for combinations in which the dependent person is subject, wholly or in part, to FC, and the maximum range occurs only at the most extreme degree of dependence. PATTERNS BASED ON SYMMETRIC COMPONENTS Our final foray into the domain of 2 x 2 matrices is limited to patterns based on symmetric components. These are the patterns in which the two persons are affected by each type of control to the same degree; that is, A’s component weight for RC is of the same magnitude as B’s and the same is true, respectively, for their FC and BC weights. In short, IRC 4! = |RCgl, IFC ,| = |FC,|, and IBC,,| = IBC ,!. Therefore, when we refer to an MFC component of 4, we mean that each person’s weight for FC has a value of 4. The sign of each FC weight may be positive or negative and is reflected in the concordant—discordant relations between the MFC component and the other components. We now consider not only the distribution of patterns over our map of the domain but also the details of the patterns themselves. This will give us a close look at the details of the interdependence portion of our map (with the exception of the FC, BC part). In particular, we will have an opportunity to note the location of certain classical patterns such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma, Battle of the Sexes, and Chicken. First we examine combinations of pairs of the components and then combinations of all three. Combinations of MFC and MBC Figure 4.3 presents the set of patterns generated by combining MFC and MBC in various proportions, as indicated along the vertical axis of the figure. For each ratio of MFC to MBC the components are combined in all possible concordant and discordant relations. BRC being absent, these patterns represent cases of total interdependence. Thus Figure 4.3 constitutes an exploration in detail of the uppermost chart in Figure 4.2. As there, noncorrespondent and correspondent MBC define the extremes of Ratio of MFC to MBC Noncorrespondence Degree of correspondence Figure 4.3 Combinations of MFC and MBC. the correspondence dimension and MFC provides a_definition of its midpoint. The distribution of the patterns in Figure 4.3 shows that with increasing preponderance of MFC the mixtures approach the middle of the correspondence—noncorrespondence dimension. (The two columns of matrices on the right of the figure share the same correspondence values. Those on the right, however, are more correspondent when a correction is made in the index of correspondence to take account of the shape of the ‘frontier.’ This correction is discussed in Chapter The patterns in Figure 4.3 reflect the relations between actions necessary to exercise benevolent fate control and the pairs of actions necessary DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES to satisfy coordination preferences or requirements. The BRC component being absent, these patterns have the important property that the person has no behavioral choice that he prefers regardless of what the partner does (often referred to as a dominant choice). Moreover, the person’s two alternative behaviors present him with a relatively risky versus a relatively safe choice. Depending on what the partner does, one action affords sharply different possible outcomes (e.g., 12 versus 0), whereas the other action provides more similar ones (e.g., 8 versus 4). The degree to which this is true increases as the MFC and MBC components become increasingly equal in magnitude, the outcomes for the equal case being 12 versus 0 compared with 6 versus 6. Thus each person has no RC basis for choice (his two actions yield him the same average outcome), but he is given the possibility of choice on the basis of perceived riskiness (differences in variability of possible outcomes). Among the occasions on which the two persons have the same preferences regarding their joint outcomes (correspondent MBC) the MFC can be either concordant or discordant with these preferences. The concordant patterns, shown along the right side of Figure 4.3, have relatively high correspondence and in all cases there is a mutually preferred joint activity, CC. For each person action C is the one that both helps the partner and involves the greatest risk. Thus successful accommodation here probably requires willingness to help the partner in the confidence that he will reciprocate. This problem seems to become most severe with intermediate ratios of MFC to MBC, the patterns in which the fate control over the partner is considerable but enough MBC is present that the combination involves considerably greater risk for the helping action. Two of the discordant patterns, differing only in the relative magnitudes of MBC and MFC, have been referred to as Chicken and Battle of the Sexes. The Chicken pattern provides an opportunity to demonstrate one’s willingness to take risk and in doing so to outdo the other person. For this to be true Chicken must be located at an appropriate intermediate position between pure MFC (where there is maximum ability to reduce the other’s outcomes and to maximize one’s potential advantage over him but no difference between the choices in their riskiness) and MFC = MBC (where D is, to a maximal degree, the riskier choice, but the difference in possible scores is not very great, correspondence being rather considerable). In Chapter 5 we discuss more systematically the question raised here of the optimal ratios of components for certain patterns. The irony of Chicken lies in the fact that although CC yields good outcomes for both persons the pull of competition and risk-taking motivation moves the two persons away from that cell to the mutually least advantageous. This is to be contrasted with the Prisoner’s Dilemma in which the same effect is achieved by virtue of each person’s pursuit of his RC and, possibly, a competitive advantage. Battle of the Sexes refers to the problem a husband and wife often have in coordinating their activities because of their preferences for what each other does; for example, they both strongly prefer that one play the piano while the other sings rather than have both attempt either activity. Yet each (less strongly) prefers to hear his partner play the piano rather than sing. The predominance of the MBC factor means that coordination is the salient feature of the Battle of the Sexes relationship. The discordant MFC component creates a situation in which the strong coordination preferences are best satisfied only by_an alteration procedure in which each person temporarily permits the other to act in a way the former does not prefer. These properties, characteristic of the Battle of the Sexes relationship, are present over a range of MFC to MBC ratios, but it seems intuitively clear that the conflict between the coordination requirement and the MFC preferences becomes sharpest for ratios of MFC and MBC in the neighborhood of 4:8. It is here that it is highly important that the pair coordinate on one or the other of the two cells with high totals and, because the difference in payoffs is fairly large in these cells, that the pair alternate between them. Again we encounter the problem of the optimal ratio of components for a given pattern, a problem to be considered in Chapter 5. The combinations of MFC and noncorrespondent MBC are all asymmetric games. (Compare the symmetry of outcomes around the major diagonal of the matrices on the right of Figure 4.3 with the asymmetry in the matrices on the left.) In the patterns in Figure 4.3 the MFC is concordant with A’s coordination preferences and discordant with B’s. This asymmetry is reflected in two properties of the pattern. First, the maximum total outcomes (often referred to as maximal joint payoff or MJP) are attained only by a joint action that favors A. Thus, if equal outcomes are to be attained by some sort of alternation, something less than MJP must be acceptable for the pair. This irreconcilability between MJP and equal division appears to be most severe with patterns in the region of 4:8 to6:6. Itis for these patterns that (a) B is greatly concerned about his small share of the MJP cell and (b) the joint profit is greatly reduced by adopting a procedure that permits equal shares. This irreconcilability is potentially important to the pair because it places in contraposition two common social values, namely, the general (total) welfare versus justice (equality). Second, although turn taking is necessary to approach equality of outcomes, exact equality requires a special ratio of turns favoring A over B; for example, for equality to prevail in the 4:8 pattern there must be a3 to 2 trade off between the 12, 4 (CC) and 0, 12 (CD) cells. The resulting DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES average joint score of 14.4 is to be compared with 16 in the MJP cell. (It isa simple mathematical fact, but perhaps of social psychological importance, that the most efficient turn taking is one that involves a trade off between the MJP cell and another cell in which the person disadvantaged in the MJP cell has the greatest advantage. So for an equal-share, optimal joint-profit exchange the party favored in the MJP cell must be willing to move to another cell that he likes least, that is, from the 12, 4 cell to the 0, 12 cell rather than to the 4, 8 cell in the 4:8 pattern in Figure 4.3.) As the MFC component becomes relatively more important, the need for turn taking as a means of approaching equality is reduced and, of course, with high MFC each person needs only induce his partner to exercise his fate control benevolently. Combinations of BRC and MBC With the addition of MBC to BRC shown in Figure 4.4 we generate patterns that vary in the degree of interdependence. Interdependence is maximal at the top of the figure where the BRC is minimal, whereas at the bottom of the figure, with pure BRC, there is, of course, no interdependence at all. The pure BRC pattern, like the MFC, has an intermediate degree of correspondence. Figure 4.4 will be recognized as corresponding to the MBC branch of Figure 4.2. (Again the two right columns of matrices share the same correspondence values. Their relative positions in the figure reflect a correction for the frontier values, described in Chapter 5.) On the right side of Figure 4.4 are patterns based on correspondent MBC in which the two persons have the same preferences regarding their joint activities. The various patterns reflect whether the BRC preferences promote the commonly desired coordination by concordance with the MBC pattern or whether they interfere with it because of a discordant fit. It can be seen that all the concordant combinations contain one mutually preferred cell and that the advantage of this cell in relation to the next best one (in terms of mutual preference) increases with increasing BRC. Thus with increasing magnitude the BRC component reduces the necessity for the pair to coordinate between two good, mutually preferred sets of activities. For lower degrees of BRC (upper portion of the figure) it provides a means of solving the coordination problem by having each person follow his own RC preferences. There is probably some low ratio of BRC to MBC, perhaps 2:10, where there is an optimal “mix” of these two properties; that is, where there is enough BRC to afford a dependable basis for coordination but enough MBC to make coordination important to the pair. AVA VA TAZ Ml Bese AA ee IN REN an canem 1 NIN pealesened ie pais) Cott NGS SaRAS SONNY (Sy .2s ES INI Behl bs Noncorrespondence Degree of correspondence Correspondence Figure 4.4 Combinations of BRC and MBC. With small magnitudes of BRC the discordant fit reduces the degree of correspondence and thereby increases the need for alternation between diagonal cells if equal and good outcomes are to be attained. Following the BRC brings the pair to mutually low outcomes. Thus with weak preferences regarding own behavior that conflict with coordination requirements it is impossible for both persons to attain maximum satisfaction at the same time. Good outcomes can come only by alternation which requires selective inhibition of the RC factors. This relationship has been called Hero by Rapoport and Guyer (1966) for the reason that when both persons are acting according to their RCs a person who then foreDOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES goes his RC advantage (moving from C to D) improves the outcomes for both but more so for the other person than for himself. As shown in Figure 4.4, with increasing relative magnitude of the BRC component this problem disappears and maximum joint outcomes (MJP) become available if each person simply acts on his RC preferences. Once again there appears to be some low-to-intermediate ratio of BRC to MBC in which the psychological properties of Hero are optimal. In the neighborhood of 4:8 there is, on the one hand, a fairly strong basis in RC for each person to make the C choice and, on the other, sizable negative consequences for both person’s doing so (MJP cell versus next best cell is large). When the MBC component is noncorrespondent, the BRC component will be concordant for one party and discordant for the other. In Figure 4.4 the concordance has been created for person A who controls the columns. If both persons follow their RC preferences, their actions converge on the outcome A prefers. Like the comparable patterns of MFC and MBC in Figure 4.3, these noncorrespondent patterns are characterized by irreconcilability between maximum joint outcomes and equality of outcomes. As in the MFC + MBC patterns, this conflict between MJP and equality is sharpest for patterns with ratios around 4:8 to 6:6. The difference between the two sets of patterns is in which person is in a position to shift the pair between the two cells providing optimal tradeoff. Here it is the person who is advantaged in the MJP cell, whereas for the patterns in Figure 4.3 it is the disadvantaged person. (In asymmetrical MBC patterns with noncorrespondence, also characterized by this irreconcilability, either party can make the move necessary for optimal tradeoff. In the BRC + MFC asymmetrical combinations in Figure 4.5 that are characterized by irreconcilability it is the advantaged person who must provide the optimal tradeoff.) Combinations of BRC and MFC Some of the specific patterns generated by combining MFC with BRC in various degrees and ways are shown in Figure 4.5. The ratio of BRC to MFC decreases as we move toward the top of the figure. Figure 4.5 corresponds to the MFC branch of Figure 4.2. With symmetric components MFC can be combined with BRC in only three ways. The results are shown from left to right for the combinations discordant for both A and B, concordant for A but discordant for B, and concordant for both. The two patterns at the extreme left and right are those in which the two components are equal. In the left pattern, which is one of perfect noncorrespondence, the degree of BRC (cost to each person) is just sufficient to offset the degree of MFC (reward he delivers to his partner). This yields (so) a WAS WA Cae Kaka ed Ged eed be oO S be cS) Was VAVA VAVA BVAVZ VAVA ie) >) Ratio of BRC to MFC fon) o a =a My RS Degree of correspondence Figure 4.5 Combinations of BRC and MFC. a “‘constant-sum” relationship; whatever one person can do for the other by the benevolent use of his fate control is exactly counterbalanced by rewards he has to give up or costs he must incur in order to do so. Thus the total outcome to the pair is constant over the entire matrix. (Obviously if appropriate values are used the relationship is ‘zero-sum,’ the net outcome to the pair—the gains of one less the losses of the other—always being zero, no matter what they do.) This kind of perfectly competitive relationship is to be compared with noncorrespondent MBC (e.g., Figure DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES 4.4), in which case the two persons have similarly strong preferences regarding the joint activities of the pair but these preferences are totally in disagreement. Rather than the conflict of interest being caused by the incompatibility between each person’s RC and his partner’s FC, it arises from the incompatibility between their BCs. A comparison of the two reveals that the different patterns have different consequences; for example, they differ with respect to the manner in which equal outcomes can be achieved. Cells of moderate outcomes exist in the MFC plus BRC patterns, whereas these outcomes can be obtained only by a regular alternation procedure in the noncorrespondent MBC pattern. Similar observations can be made regarding the two types of perfectly cooperative relationship, the one arising from a concordance between each person’s RC and the partner’s FC (Figure 4.5) and the other, from correspondent MBC. The former yields only one jointly best outcome, whereas the latter involves two such points. This results in different problems for the pair if they are to attain maximum joint outcome. With BRC + MFC this requires merely that each one follow his RC, but in the case of correspondent MBC a joint coordination on one of the best points is necessary. The patterns in which MFC is greater in magnitude than BRC are among the most thoroughly investigated in game research, the bilaterally discordant one being the Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG) and the bilaterally concordant, the maximizing difference game (MDG). In both (as in all the patterns in Figure 4.5 in which BRC is greater than zero) each person has a “dominant” response, that is, an action that, because of the RC factor, yields him better outcomes no matter what the other person does. In the case of the PDG pattern, if both choose these dominant responses, the total outcomes for the pair are the lowest in the relationship. It is the irony of this type of relationship that as each person pursues his own interest the general welfare of the pair suffers. This aspect of the pattern seems to be most marked for some ratio of BRC to MFC intermediate between 6:6 and 0:12, a point we discuss in Chapter 2. A further property of the PDG is that the dominant response yields the possibility of gaining a higher score than the other person, which might be important for someone competitively motivated. The MDG pattern separates this consequence from the dominant response. In the MDG pattern the dominant response (C) serves to yield the best possible outcomes for the pair and the individual but not to maximize the difference between one’s own score and the partner’s. If a person wishes to try to maximize this difference (i.e., to best his partner), he must incur a loss to do so, this being equal to the RC. With increasing magnitude of RC the degree to which he can surpass the partner decreases so he must expend more cost for a smaller difference. Thus the set of patterns over the range of 6:6 to 0:12 provides a means of assessing the person’s desire to surpass his partner. Their joint use permits an answer to the question: How much loss will this person undergo possibly to gain more than his partner? (It is not apparent in Figure 4.5, but by varying the magnitudes of the two components independently (rather than relatively) the cost can be held constant and the possible difference varied or the size of the possible difference can be held constant and the cost varied. The former is accomplished by holding BRC constant and varying the MFC component, the latter by varying both components simultaneously.) When BRC is concordant with MFC for one person but discordant for the other, we have the threat game. This has already been discussed and a version of it, used in research by Rapoport and Guyer, is described and analyzed in Figure 2.3. In the center column of Figure 4.5 RC is concordant with FC for B (the row player) but discordant for A (the column player). His RC makes it desirable for B to make the C choice which is to their mutual advantage. A’s RC, however, makes it desirable for him to make the D choice which results in a large outcome for himself and a relatively small one forB. This, of course, raises the question of equity and B’s ultimate response to inequitable treatment is to threaten to make his D move (hence the name of the game). In short, the pattern creates an asymmetry of roles between A and B. The attainment of high outcomes is dependent on B’s continuing to play C, whereas the fair division of those outcomes requires A to alternate in some fashion between his two actions. Thus ina schematic way the pattern portrays the problem of managing an exchange of B’s loyalty to the mutual interest for A’s just treatment of him. This problem has been studied extensively by Thibaut and Faucheux (1965) in what is essentially an expanded version of the 2 x 2 threat game. The properties of the threat game, already described, are obviously most strongly present at intermediate ratios of BRC to MFC. Person A’s temptation to exploit B increases with decreasing MFC but B’s unhappiness with such treatment decreases as we move down the scale. Person B’s ability to threaten effectively probably declines as we move down the scale inasmuch as there is a decrease in the magnitude of his FC effect on A and an increase in the RC counter to the negative use of his FC. The optimal mix of conditions, entailing A’s temptation to be unjust and B’s ability to pose an effective threat, probably occurs in the range of 4:8 to 6:6 ratios of BRC to MFC. It may be noted that Rapoport and Guyer used approximately a 1:2 ratio. DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES Combinations of All Three Components So far we have considered all possible configurations of pairs of symmetrical components, meshed together in all possible orientations. There still remain to be explored the combinations of symmetric components taken three at a time. It may be helpful to show how these threecomponent patterns relate to those we have already considered and at the same time give the reader a more general view of the dimensions and shape of the subdomain of symmetric-component patterns. The general outline of the subdomain is shown in Figure 4.6. The three preceding figures are placed together to forma solid. Figures 4.4 and 4.5 are joined at the pattern they share (BRC), Figure 4.5 forming the near surface of the solid and Figure 4.4, the far surface. Then Figure 4.3 is joined to Figure 4.4 at the two patterns they share (correspondent and noncorrespondent MBC) and Figure 4.3 is joined to Figure 4.5 at the MFC pattern. The reader will understand that we are forming a threeNCR MBC BRC Figure 4.6 Space defined by symmetric component matrices. dimensional figure with three of the charts in the interdependence portion of our map of the total2 x 2 domain (cf. Figure 4.2). The MFC branch forms the near surface, the MBC branch forms the far surface, and the chart of the total interdependence patterns forms the top surface. This inverted solid, nearly pyramidal in shape, is balanced on the BRC tip. Minimum interdependence exists in the lower portion of the solid and total interdependence exists on the top surface. Our present interest is in combinations of all three components which exist in the interior of the solid and are represented on the ‘’mixed’’ branch of our map of the domain. One important fact about these combinations can be observed in Figure 4.2. They include perfectly correspondent and noncorrespondent patterns. In general, if we start with the combinations of MFC and MBC shown in Figure 4.3 and add a degree of BRC equal to the MFC component and either discordant or concordant with it, we generate sets of perfectly correspondent and noncorrespondent patterns. If BRC discordant with and equal to the MFC component is added to the left-hand sets of MFC plus MBC (Figure 4.3), we obtain perfectly noncorrespondent patterns. If BRC concordant with and equal to the MFC component is added to the right-hand set, we obtain perfectly correspondent patterns. Another way to describe these patterns is as combinations of the two basic types of correspondence and noncorrespondence that occur in interdependent relations: (a) MBC patterns and (b) equal-ratio combinations of MFC and BRC. The resulting patterns are shown in Figure 4.7. (The two columns of matrices on the right are characterized by the same degrees of correspondence, namely, perfect correspondence.) The most notable properties of the patterns are those we have noted before having to do with whether the MBC or the MFC plus BRC is the more important. Comparing the noncorrespondent or competitive relationships on the left, we observe that when MBC is predominant (in the upper patterns) each person is uncertain about what action to take. He prefers to see what the other person will do so that he can then make the best counteradjustment to that action. Of course, there is no reason for either person to act first or to agree on or settle on any joint action. Toward the bottom of the figure, with increasing MFC plus BRC, this property of the relationship decreases in importance. Thus in the lower patterns, in which the MFC plus BRC aspect is predominant, each has a preferred or dominant action (generated by his RC) and each can take that action because it is better for him, no matter what the partner does. The correspondent or cooperative patterns at the right vary in a similar manner from the upper to the lower ones. With a relatively strong MBC component there tends to be more than one mutually desirable point of DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES XN SR xa 0:0:12 ee oO VAVA Fel ze es Vales Noncorrespondence Correspondence Degree of correspondence Figure 4.7 Perfectly correspondent and noncorrespondent combinations of BRC, MFC, and MBC. coordination. With a relatively strong MFC plus BRC component there is only one mutually best point which is attained if each follows his RC. The patterns in which the MFC plus BRC complex is concordant with the MBC component (on the far right) are superior to the discordant in both respects. For even low values of MFC plus BRC the RC-maximizing actions take the pair to what is best for both. The set of matrices in Figure 4.7 can be visualized in Figure 4.6 as lying along lines connecting matrices on the front surface with those corresponding at the rear of the solid. The noncorrespondent matrices extend from point M (the equal-ratio, discordant combination of MFC and BRC) to point N (noncorrespondent MBC); the correspondent ones extend from point O (the equal-ratio, concordant combination of MFC and BRC) to point P (correspondent MBC). The upward slope of these lines (which the reader is asked to imagine in Figure 4.6) carries an important implication, mentioned before but emphasized here. This is that conflict of interest (noncorrespondence) reaches its maximum in the MFC realm at moderate degrees of interdependence. The same can be said, of course, with respect to commonality of interest. Correspondence reaches its maximum in MFC relationships only at moderate degrees of interdependence. Both conflict and commonality of interest occur with maximum interdependence only for coordination (MBC) patterns. We examined a sizable number of the three-component matrices to be found in the interior of the solid implied by Figure 4.6. Most different from the two-component patterns summarized in Figures 4.3 through 4.5 are the equal-ratio patterns in which the BRC: MFC:MBC ratio is 4:4:4, The remaining patterns are blends or intermediate cases having the properties of various matrices already familiar to us. We do not find patterns that are ‘better’ versions of those we have already seen. We do not find, for example, a Prisoner’s Dilemma game that represents the properties of the PDG to a greater degree or in a clearer manner than the two-component PDG identified in Figure 4.5. Indeed the three-component patterns most similar to any of the classic patterns (such as the PDG) seem to be versions of it that are less clear than the two-component patterns identified. This complex point is considered in Chapter 5. The equal-ratio, three-component patterns constitute 10 of the 30 two-outcome-level matrices considered earlier. Three of the 10 are the perfectly correspondent and noncorrespondent patterns in the middle row of Figure 4.7. The two correspondent patterns reflect different “task requirements” (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959, Chapter 9). The left matrix incorporates a disjunctive task requirement: if either person makes the correct response, both receive the maximum reward. The second represents a conjunctive task requirement: only if both persons make the proper response do both receive the maximum reward. These patterns are of special interest when the two response alternatives for the two persons are the same. Assume that under this condition the two persons are uncertain which response is correct (eg., which path to take or which vacation to go on). If the pattern is known to be disjunctive, then it is desirable for each to make a different response; for example, in searching DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES for their lost child (who is found, of course, if either parent finds him), the mother and father should take different paths of the two he might have followed. Under uncertainty, the conjunctive pattern might be called the blame game, inasmuch as it creates problems of credit and blame for the pair. The first person to commit himself to a given response requires the other to follow suit, unless failure is to be guaranteed. Thus the first actor becomes clearly responsible for the pair’s success or failure; for example, the one who decides which road to take when the situation constrains the pair to travel together becomes subject to blame if it is the wrong one. The two equal-ratio, three-component patterns shown in Figure 4.8 (which are also two-outcome-level matrices) have the same location in differences derive from symmetry versus asymmetry in concordance-—discordance. In both patterns person B is dependent on A’s making a certain response that is contrary to A’s RC. In the right matrix the same discordance holds for A’s dependence on B, but in the left matrix B’s RC preferences are concordant with what A prefers him to do. The left matrix is the prototype of the threat game described in Chapter 2 and earlier in this Chapter. The asymmetry of concordance—discordance creates a situation in which B’s preferences promote the conditions under which A is able to gain high outcomes but B is not. The threat of acting against his own preferences in order to punish A is the means available to B to induce A to act contrary to his preference in order to permit B (sometimes) to obtain high outcomes. A a a B by Prototypic threat Prototypic turn—taking game game Figure 4.8 Two prototypic games. In the same way that the left matrix is a prototype of the threat game the right matrix in Figure 4.8 is the most elementary version of a set of more complex, symmetrical, turn-taking games. Like Battle of the Sexes and Hero, this pattern lends itself to coordinated alternation as a means of enabling each person occasionally to have his high outcome. A contrast is to be made with the noncorrespondent MBC pattern (upper left matrix in Figure 4.7) in which an alternation of high outcomes between the two persons is generated simply by one person alternating his choice while the other maintains his (much as in the Threat game except that either person may hold while the other alternates). In contrast, the turn-taking pattern requires coordinated shifting, both going simultaneously from a,b, to agb, if mutually low outcomes are to be avoided. SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE A basic fact of interdependence is that one person’s dependence provides a basis for the other’s power. In dependence relationships as we have described them, person B has power over the dependent one, A, to the extent that A is dependent. The nature of this power depends on the basis of A’s dependence, the differences here being reflected, as explained in Chapter 1, in our terms for these two bases of dependence. With fate control B can affect A’s level of outcome; with behavior control B can make it desirable for A to adjust his behavior to that of B. In either case the ease with which B can exercise the control depends on B’s reflexive control. The greater B’s RC, the more his behavioral preferences limit his flexibility in varying his behavior and therefore in exercising control over A. If B has fate control over A, then the probable consequences of B’s power depend on the correspondence or noncorrespondence between their outcomes. With high correspondence B will tend to enact the behavior that satisfies A (B’s RC is concordant with his FC over A). With high noncorrespondence B will tend to enact the behavior that yields low outcomes to A (B’s RC is discordant with his FC over A). (These two cases are illustrated in the upper portion of Figure 4.10.) In interdependent relationships the mutual dependence results in mutual power. Each person has power over his partner to the extent that the partner is dependent. Again the nature of this power depends on the basis of the partner’s dependence, whether FC or BC. Also, the ease of using power depends on the RC of its possessor. This is appropriately illustrated by several versions of the threat game (Figure 4.9). In all three cases person B may need to threaten A witha drop in outcomes (achieved by theb, action) in order to induce A occasionally to give B high outcomes. In the two-outcome-level pattern in Figure 4.9 (Matrix F) B can produce the threatened drop at no loss in his own outcomes (assuming A is persisting with the a, action). In Matrix G, the RC + FC combination from DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES Figure 4.5, B produces the drop in A’s outcomes only by suffering a similar loss in his own outcomes, and in Matrix H to carry out his threat B must incur a greater drop in outcomes than the one he produces in A’s. These three cases represent increasing difficulty in B’s carrying out the threat action. Social-psychologically, they represent decreasing degrees to which it will be credible to A that B will back up with action any verbal threat he makes. Matrix F Matrix G Matrix H Figure 4.9 Different versions of the threat game. A different social psychological perspective on the various patterns of interdependence is provided by considering the problems they pose to the dependent person or persons. In dependent relations the important significance of the FC versus BC distinction is that it determines the problem situation in which a dependent person finds himself. The fact that a person is dependent means that getting a high outcome is not wholly under his own control. Thus he is faced with a problem—a problem involving what if anything he himself must do, what action is required of his partner, the consequences of that action for the partner, and the means at his disposal of influencing the partner’s action. The specifics of these matters are readily seen in the two-outcome-level patterns shown in Figure 4.10. All the matrices are arranged in this figure so that the dependent person is A, who makes the choice between columns. For simplicity high outcomes are indicated by plus signs and low outcomes, by blanks. When subject to FC, asin the upper part of the figure, A is helpless to do anything about his outcome directly. He can only plead with B to make the choice that will benefit him. The correspondence of outcomes is such on the right that he may be able to count on success, but in the left matrix the noncorrespondence makes his prospects seem rather bleak. When subject to BC, as in the lower pattern, A can obtain his high outcome by waiting for B’s move (or anticipating it from B’s RC) and then coordinating with it. On occasions on which he is subject to both FC and BC A’s problem is a mixture of dependence on B’s action and on his own coordinating choice. Ree caine ssi ested See Figure 4.10 Some two-outcome-level patterns of dependence. With mutual dependence both actors have problems. Again these are well illustrated by two-outcome-level patterns (Figure 4.11). The problems may be similar, as in the MBC patterns in which both have the problem of coordinating with each other or in the MFC pattern in which each has the problem of inducing his partner to perform the appropriate action. The latter can be described as exchanging the benevolent use of fate control. In general, patterns characterized primarily by MFC pose problems of exchange. In contrast, patterns characterized primarily by MBC pose problems of coordination. With the mixtures of FC and BC components in the middle of Figure 4.11 the two actor’s problems may be similar (as in the turn-taking game) or different (as in the threat game and the FC, BC pattern), but in every example of these mixtures the problems are complex. For any given matrix, as in Figure 4.11, it is not difficult to imagine the interaction process that is set into motion as the two persons try to solve their respective problems. (By writing descriptions of A’s and B’s problems for various patterns and then spelling out the probable resulting scenarios, the reader will see for himself the amazing array of subtle variations in interaction generated by the simple two-outcome-level matrices.) A major determinant of this interaction process will be the correspondence or noncorrespondence between the two person’s outcomes because this determines the degree of compatibility of the solutions to their problems. When the solutions are compatible, as in cases of high correspondence, it is easy to imagine how a shared or common problem emerges with joint attention to fulfilling the intersecting requirements DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES MFC Turn—taking Threat FC — BC Conjunctive cooperative game game game Noncorrespondent Correspondent MBC Figure 4.11 Some two-outcome-level patterns of interdependence. expeditiously and without mistakes. Correspondent MBC in Figure 4.11 is probably more susceptible to incoordination than the conjunctive cooperative matrix because it does not profit from a convergence of the preferences on a single obvious solution. Accordingly, we should not be surprised to see the development of a crude role differentiation between the person who quickly takes the initiative and the one who acts more slowly and imitatively. When the solutions are not compatible, as in noncorrespondence, we can imagine what each person may attempt to ensure that his own requirements are met: outwaiting the partner, feinting or faking out the partner, making false promises, proposing selfadvantageous rules, and so on. Circumstances permitting, we can expect pairs with incompatible solutions to devise ways of extending the interaction and making them partly compatible by turn taking over successive occasions. In this way, by taking turns in obtaining their respective high outcomes by coordinated shifting in the turn-taking game, the incompatibilities are reduced and the interdependence is changed. Of course, the incompatible requirements may not always be reconciled and the ultimate adaptation of the dependent person may often be to accept the nonachievement of his best outcome. These matters are considered later in relation to sequential transformations and bargaining processes. To summarize the present discussion, the distinctions we have used in organizing our map of the 2 x 2 domain reflect the basic ways in which interdependence structures differ. They obviously have implications for the process deriving from each structure. Mutuality and degree of dependence relate to power differences or, putting it otherwise, differences between the two persons in their vulnerability. The properties of the pattern undoubtedly relate to such things as asymmetries in orientation and attention to the interaction, amount and quality of communication, and allocation of outcomes. The degree of correspondence or noncorrespondence relates to the amount of conflict of interest in the relationship and to the rate of cooperation or competition in the emerging interaction process. The basis of interdependence, whether FC or BC, specifies important aspects of the problem the dependent person faces in trying to attain his high outcomes and the means, if any, at his disposal for solving that problem. In cases of mutual dependence and some degree of correspondence these distinctions define the problem the pair faces jointly, the MFC end of the continuum being the locus of exchange problems and the MBC end, the locus of coordination problems. The present discussion has focused on the interaction process appropriate to each interdependence matrix. Without making it explicit, we have assumed for the most part that the pattern is the one that characterizes the effective matrix; that is, most of our comments have assumed that the matrix under consideration reflects the outcomes that each person is trying to maximize in the course of the interaction. In later chapters we consider patterns as they relate to the given matrix. In Chapter 7 we analyze a variety of patterns of given matrices as settings in which people learn social rules and values. In Chapter 8 we take up the related issues of self-expression and -presentation. Given matrices are viewed there as settings in which individuals can show themselves to be certain kinds of persons. Prior Research It is not our intention to make a thorough review of the research that relates to our theoretical analysis. Reference to several studies at this point, however, may serve to indicate the relevance of the distinctions to the empirical investigation of interpersonal relationships. DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES A study by Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan (1976) suggests how some of the properties of interdependence patterns may be represented in perceptions of interpersonal relationships. Subjects were asked to rate a large number of relationships (e.g., siblings, parent and child, business partners, and political opponents) on a number of semantic differential scales (e.g., very cooperative versus very competitive, very active versus very inactive). The results were analyzed by a method of multidimensional scaling to reveal the distinctions the subjects make among the various relationships. If, as we have argued, the properties of interdependence patterns produce important variations in the interaction process, we should expect the properties to be reflected in the terms in which people differentiate relationships. This assumes, of course, that an entire relationship can be characterized by a single matrix or at least by a delimited set of matrices. It is obvious that any extensive relationship, as between a parent and child, encompasses many areas and many kinds of interdependence. Yet it is possible that a relationship may take its meaning from the one or two interdependence patterns that are most characteristic of its problems and situations. Consistent with the last assumption, the perceived dimensions of respond for the most part to the matrix properties. “Equal versus unequal,” best defined by ratings on “exactly equal versus extremely unequal power,” corresponds to mutuality (versus nonmutuality) of dependence. ‘Intense versus superficial,” best defined by “intense versus superficial interaction with each other,’’ seems to reflect the degree of interdependence (or dependence) in the relationship. “Cooperative and friendly versus competitive and hostile,’” best defined by ‘always harmonious versus always clashing,” is clearly similar to the correspondence versus noncorrespondence in the relationship. Only our distinction between FC- and BC-based relationships is not clearly reflected in the Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan dimensions. They describe their fourth dimension as ‘socioemotional and informal versus task-oriented and formal.” It is best defined by a rating scale of “pleasure-oriented versus workoriented.’” Although the matter is not perfectly clear, it may mirror certain aspects that will indicate whether a relationship primarily involves MBC (coordination) or MFC (exchange). The latter is presumably more typical of economic or business transactions, and indeed such relationships are located exclusively in the task-oriented half of the dimension. Relationships at the socioemotional end of the scale (close friends, siblings, husband and wife) may prominently involve MBC for one or both of two reasons: (a) in these relationships specific activities are often less important than whether they are done together (i.e., in coordination); (b) these relationships commonly involve the sharing of limited living space and facilities which poses problems of coordination. Proceeding on the assumption that Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan’s intensity and cooperative-competitive dimensions correspond respectively to the matrix properties of degree of dependence and correspondence-noncorrespondence, we used their data to test one of the implications of the matrix analysis. This is that the variance in correspondence-noncorrespondence will be greater for high degrees of interdependence than for low. The basis of this expectation is seen in Figure 4.2. With increasing dependence, either toward interdependence or dependence, there is, in general, an increase in the differentiation of the patterns with regard to correspondence—noncorrespondence. When the data from the two figures in the Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan article are replotted appropriately, they appear to be consistent with this analysis. The relationships on the intense side of the superficial—intense scale show greater variance on the cooperative-competitive scale than do those on the superficial side. This result is presented not as definitive but merely to illustrate how the implications of the configurations in Figure 4.3 might be tested with the sort of data gathered by Wish and his colleagues; for example, a clear basis for distinguishing MFC-based interdependence from MBC-based interdependence would permit testing the implication that the maximum dispersion of correspondence-noncorrespondence occurs in relationships of moderate interdependence in the first case but of extreme interdependence in the second. The FC-BC distinction is not clear in the Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan work, but it has a clear and important parallel in Steiner’s (1972) analysis of group process. In analyzing the process losses incurred in groups, Steiner distinguishes between (a) losses from lack of interpersonal coordination, matching, and temporal programming and (b) losses from inadequate member motivation to make high-quality contributions to the group (p. 83). The first clearly refers to problems created by MBC. The second reflects the role of MFC in combination with discordant BRC,.as in the PDG or the perfectly competitive MFC + BRC pattern. The person prefers not to enact the behaviors that are desired by other members, either for reasons of laziness or other cost-avoidance motives or because alternative behaviors are more rewarding. Steiner’s concern is with the effects of group size and its relation to these two types of process loss. In the present context we are interested simply in noting that the two bases of interdependence provide a theoretical foundation for the two types of loss he distinguishes. DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES SALIENT MATRICES One of our purposes in exploring the domain of 2 x 2 matrices was to identify the “salient” or landmark patterns which by virtue of their location in the domain typify certain classes of pattern. In some cases these patterns stand at a corner of the domain and therefore represent in the extreme a particular kind of pattern. In others one of these patterns best typifies a subgroup of patterns by virtue of its central location in that group. We merely list these salient patterns and indicate the preceding figures in which they may be found. Other students of the 2 x 2 matrix will undoubtedly wish to add to the list, but we find 22 matrices worthy of note: Independence 1. Bilateral reflexive control (BRC). Figure 4.4 or 4.5 Interdependence 1. Mutual fate control (MFC). Figure 4.3 or 4.5 2. Correspondent mutual behavior control (CR MBC); Figure 4.3 or 4.4 3. Noncorrespondent mutual behavior control (NCR MBC); Figure 4.3 or 4.4 4. Combinations of MFC and MBC (Figure 4.3) 4.1 Chicken 4.2 Battle of the Sexes 5. Combinations of BRC and MBC (Figure 4.4) 5.1 Hero 5.2 Martyr 6. Combinations of BRC and MFC (Figure 4.5) 6.1 Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG) 6.2 Maximizing difference game (MDG) 6.3 Threat game 6.4 Correspondent (cooperative or constant-difference) game 6.5 Noncorrespondent (competitive or constant-sum) game . Fate control-behavior control (FC, BC); Figure 4.11 8. Equal-ratio combinations of BRC, MFC, and MBC 8.1 Prototypic threat game (Figure 4.8) 8.2 Prototypic turn-taking game (Figure 4.8) 8.3 Disjunctive cooperative game (Figure 4.7) 8.4 Conjunctive cooperative game (Figure 4.7) 8.5 Noncorrespondent (competitive) game (Figure 4.7) N Dependence (Figure 4.10) TPO, NO 1.1 Correspondent 1.2 Noncorrespondent ZI BERE The reader who has an understanding of these landmark patterns and a sense of their locations in relation to one another can be assured of finding his or her way through the terrain of the 2 x 2 domain.

