Properties and Indices of Interdependence Patterns Dependence and Interdependence, 114 Effect on Dependence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions, 115 Correspondence versus Noncorrespondence of Outcomes, 117 The Definition and Indexing of Correspondence, 117 Correspondence as a Function of the Components, 120 Effect on Correspondence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions: The Frontier Values, 121 Control over Pair Outcomes, 125 Optimal Patterns and Choice Dilemmas, 129 Acuteness of Choice Dilemmas, 133 a P ew B oe. ee NAT me heal al valm=ane-bron| Ses © t J @enifeld at i >iwt wine TT, 9 | ey ip. oe ft) wesbnn wwe. / Lameel? ying a oF ver rr’ git hoe R wet WrTan r va » Wrted ict ~ ne vitals A inesie } itis @ Wo rannios s a abremeriiol et Ri waee ? Seta ting vi siwllian a4 ‘a ABSTRACT This chapter proposes indices for the major properties of interdependence patterns and describes how they are related to the components of interdependence. This provides a systematic analysis of what was done intuitively in Chapter 4; namely, a delineation of the links between the properties of the matrix, on the one hand, and the components and their interrelations that underlie it, on the other. The analysis is also propaedeutic to those in Chapters 6 and 7, which show how the properties of the given matrix govern the necessity for transformations to be made and how the properties of the effective matrix depend jointly on the components of the given matrix and the particular transformations made. The analysis of the bases of correspondence-noncorrespondence reveals the factors underlying the two persons’ control over their joint outcomes and over the differences between their respective outcomes, which have implications for the discussion of the bargaining process in Chapter 10. Last, we give systematic attention to questions raised in Chapter 4 concerning the particular combinations of components and their weights necessary for optimal versions of various matrix games. We now consider how the important properties of interdependence matrices, described in Chapter 4, may be indexed. An important purpose is to indicate how these properties are determined by the’ components and their intermeshing. This analysis serves to suggest, by reference to Chapter 3, the possible social-psychological bases of various aspects of interdependence. It would be helpful first to remind the reader of the meaning and derivation of the component weights, their magnitudes and algebraic signs, first presented in Figure 2.5 and its associated text. Further illustrations of these concepts are provided in Figure 5.1. The matrix there has been analyzed into the three component matrices and beneath each are shown the component weights of the two persons. Nonzero components that yield high values in the upper left-hand cell are given positive signs, otherwise they are given negative signs. The relations among the signs indicate what is apparent in the patterning of the components: RC 4 is discordant with FC , because they have opposite signs; the same is true of RC, and FC,; BC, and BC, are noncorrespondent because they have opposite signs. Although less obvious the pattern of signs also summarizes the concordance—discordance relations between the MBC component and each of the other component matrices; for example, the positive BC, is discordant with the MFC component because the high outcomes of both persons are found in the upper right-hand cell (indicated by FC,, positive and FC,, negative). In what follows we use symbols for the component weights (RC 4, FC;, etc.) in our formulas to refer to values that are calculated according to the conventions indicated in Figure Del, EIN ING ct E@, = +1 Bey RC, FC, = —2 BC, Figure 5.1 Illustration of component weights. ll ll 2 DEPENDENCE AND INTERDEPENDENCE In Chapter 4 we have seen that a relationship may be characterized by interdependence, both persons being dependent on what their partners do; dependence, A being dependent on B’s actions but B not so on A’s actions; or independence, neither person being affected by his partner’s choice. These properties are readily ascertained by examining the relative magnitudes of the component weights of the interdependence matrix. The smaller RC, is in relation to FC, and BC,, the more A’s outcomes are under total or joint control by B. Ina2 x 2 matrix the variance in A’s outcomes under each of the three sources of control is proportional, respectively, to RC ,?, FC 2, and BC /2. From this the proportion of the total variance in A’s outcomes controlled wholly or partly by the partner can be calculated: Dep, = (FC + BC 4)/(RC + FC? + BC 4). This index of dependence, calculated separately for A and B, provides a generally appropriate characterization of the dependence properties of the relationship. For the matrix in Figure 5.1 Dep, =.67 and Dep, =.67. For pure BRC the two values are, respectively, .00 and .00, and for pure MFC or MBC they are 1.00 and 1.00. A case of unilateral dependence results in 1.00 for the dependent person and .00 for the independent. Effect on Dependence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions Here we encounter an example of a general problem that occurs in characterizing matrices. An index (of some particular property) appropriate for characterizing the entire matrix may not provide a good description of the particular portion that is most important in the persons’ experience of their relationship. This becomes apparent when certain plausible assumptions about behavior imply that the interaction will encompass only parts of the matrix. (In Chapter 2 this problem was discussed in relation to the grand mean. It does not describe the average level of outcomes obtained in the matrix if the two persons manage to avoid the poorer ones. We also encounter this problem in the next section in connection with the “frontier’’ values in the matrix and their relevance for characterizing its degree of correspondence.) As noted in the preceding chapter (page 80), our primary purpose in the present analyses is to characterize the matrix per se, making no assumptions about the behavior of the two persons and attempting to avoid any confusion between structure and process. In this and several other instances, however, it seems useful to point out some of the ways in which their behavior and interaction process may affect the interdependent persons’ experience with such phenomena as ‘‘dependence” and “conflict.” With regard to the experience of dependence, consider the three matrices in Figure 5.2. Intuitively, it is clear that the degree of mutual dependence is higher in Matrix II than in Matrix I. This difference is reflected in our labels for these two patterns (cf. Chapter 4), described, respectively, as disjunctive and conjunctive games. Similarly, it appears that B’s Matrix I Matrix II Matrix III A’'s*weights: +141, =1 ily) ele te Bs *weights7-11, 41,51 het lee les tit al Figure 5.2 Matrices illustrating the problems of indexing dependence. dependence is higher than A’s in Matrix III. Yet an analysis of the matrices reveals that the absolute values of the components are the same for all three. As the weights listed below each one show, all three matrices are equal-ratio, three-component patterns. Thus the proportion of nonreflexively controlled variance for each person is the same in all three cases, and the index of dependence we have proposed does not differentiate them. The examples in Figure 5.2 suggest the possibility that in determining a person’s dependence within certain relationships we need not concern ourselves with the variance in his outcomes over the entire matrix. On the assumption that he is strongly oriented toward good outcomes and knows how to get them, we need only consider the variance in outcomes he can experience when he takes his most preferred action. If person A in Matrix III chooses a,, the outcome variance controlled by his partner is zero; that is, A need not be dependent at all. Similarly, if both A and B choose their preferred responses in Matrix I, neither will be dependent on the other. The circumstances under which the components generate patterns such as those in Figure 5.2 can be determined from the matrix analysis shown in Figure 5.1. Person A’s outcomes from his preferred action (a) are not affected by B’s action because two conditions are fulfilled: |FC 4! = IBC ,|and the sign of BC , is opposite the sign of the algebraic product of RC, and FC,. The second condition may be described alternatively in terms of a ‘‘discordance’”’ between BC, and the cell on which RC, and FC, converge. This condition is not met for person B; therefore, even though he has the same general pattern of weights as A, the outcome B derives from his preferred action depends greatly on A’s action. Person B’s situation is similar to those of both persons in Matrix II, Figure 5.2. The psychological implication of this analysis is that in some 2 xX 2 cases the FC and BC acting on a person cancel Out one another's effect. When equal in magnitude, they produce an even distribution of good outcomes over one of the person’s response alternatives. If this also happens to be the choice favored by his RC, the person can ensure himself good outcomes by following his RC; for example, in Case III of Figure 5.2 assume that A and B are husband and wife and parents of a small child. Assume further that the husband has three sets of overlapping preferences: (a) he wants his wife to go out (b,), (b) he prefers himself to go out (a,) and (c) he wants someone to stay home with the child (a,b,anda,b, are preferred to the other combinations). These preferences generate the Case III pattern in which, by going out (a,) the husband gets good outcomes (has two preferences satisfied) no matter what his wife does. If she also goes out, she satisfies his first preference and if she stays home she satisfies his third preference; meanwhile he satisfies his second preference himself. CORRESPONDENCE VERSUS NONCORRESPONDENCE OF OUTCOMES The single most important property of any matrix characterized by dependence or interdependence is the degree of correspondence between the two persons’ outcomes. This property specifies the extent to which their interests in the course of the relationship are the same or different and implies how smooth or conflictual their interaction will be. In this section we develop a definition of the concept, suggest an index of correspondence, and show how correspondence is affected by the components of control. The Definition and Indexing of Correspondence What is needed is an index of the distribution of values in the matrix that will reflect the degree of commonality versus conflict of interest. We can prescribe certain general properties for the index by reference to certain basic matrices: (a) The index must be +1.00 for a pure MBC matrix in which the two persons’ outcomes covary in an identical manner and —1.00 for one in which they vary in an exact inverse manner. In the first the two will have commonality of interest in coordinating their actions, whereas in the second they will be in total conflict about which way to coordinate. (b) It must take intermediate values for intermediate patterns of MBC. We shall see what they are ina moment. (c) It must be .00 for pure MEC matrices, in which the two sets of outcomes bear no relation to each other; each person is able to raise or lower his partner’s outcomes without any effect on himself. Thus there is no conflict of interest between taking the one action or the other, but at the same time there is no convergence of interest in what each one should do. (There is, of course, a common interest in exchanging the benevolent use of fate control, but that does not concern us here.) The same condition applies with respect to pure BRC matrices. (d) For mixtures of correspondent MBC and MEFC, the index should move from +1.00 to .00 as the ratio of MFC moves from low to high. Similarly, for mixtures of noncorrespondent MBC and MEC, with an increase in the ratio of MFC to MBC, the index should move from —1.00 to .00. The same should also be true of mixtures of BRC and MBC. (These effects are shown in Figures 4.3 and 4.4.) Intermediate Degrees of Correspondence for MBC. The second condition (b) places an important constraint on our index, but before developing its implication for the index we must see what is meant by intermediate degrees of correspondence (or noncorrespondence) for MBC matrices. The answer is provided by Figure 5.3. Extreme correspondence means not only that the two persons have the same coordination preferences but that their preferences are equally strong. Intermediate degrees of correspondence reflect the fact that one person has more stake in the coordination of their behavior than the other. Thus in Figure 5.3 B’s interest in coordination is not so supportive of A’s preferences in the moderately correspondent as it is in the perfectly correspondent case. In this sense their interests are less convergent or less perfectly aligned in moderate correspondence. Similarly, extreme noncorrespondence reflects not only different coordination preferences but those that are equally strong. With a moderate degree of noncorrespondence, although B prefers a different coordination pattern than A, B is not so strongly opposed as he is with perfect noncorrespondence. Thus B’s interests are not so totally in conflict with A’s in moderate noncorrespondence. At the midpoint of the noncorrespondence—correspondence continuum (not shown in Figure 5.3, although the center matrix is an approximation) B is totally indifferent toa coordination matter with respect to which A has strong preferences. Note that this is unilateral dependence, not interdependence! By comparing this intermediate degree of correspondence—noncorrespondence in MBC with that represented by MFC we seem to have two kinds of midpoint; at the first one party is totally indifferent to the other’s actions and at the second each is concerned only with the partner’s choices. eee BEN aes = -1.00 IC = —.60 (Sealy = +.60 = +1.00 os =r, 00. IC* = — 60 ES Sy; es = +.78 os = +1.00 Figure 5.3. Degree of correspondence-noncorrespondence in pure MBC components. Index of Correspondence. It may have occurred to the reader that the Pearson product-moment correlation between the two persons’ outcomes, calculated over the four cells, would provide a convenient index of correspondence. The treatment of intermediate degrees of correspondence for pure MBC matrices precludes adopting the correlation coefficient as our index. The reason is that it would yield only three values, +1, 0, and —1, for the various MBC matrices. Thus in Figure 5.3r = —1.00 for the left three matrices and r = +1.00 for the two on the right. An index that reflects more properly the continuous variation in correspondence shown in Figure 5.3 is the following: Biase tastes IC = oO sums pe ke diffs In this formula IC refers to the index of correspondence, a2,m, is the variance of the cell sums, and o%js;, is the variance of the cell differences—the algebraic values when B’s outcome is always subtracted from A’s. (We use “variance” and a” here to refer to the mean squared deviation from the mean; i.e., the computed “sample” variance and not an estimate of a “population” variance.) The index takes a value of +1 if Osiee, =O, —Lif orum, = 0, and Oif o2.4n, =C7uires. The five values of IC for the five matrices in Figure 5.3 are, from left to right, —1.00, —.60, —.17, +.60 and +1.00. For a matrix in the exact middle of the continuum, in which B has no coordination preference, IC = .00. Thus the index satisfies the first two criteria stated at the outset. The reader can determine for himself that it also satisfies the third criterion, being .00 for pure MEFC (or BRC) matrices. It can also be shown that it moves from an extreme value toward zero as MFC (or BRC) is added in increasing ratio to MBC. The more general meaning of the IC index can be shown graphically (Figure 5.4) in which we plot A’s outcomes against B’s and sketch in with arrows the sum and difference dimensions of the scatterplot; the lengths are proportional to the two variance terms. In our IC index the term Gums reflects the magnitude of the sum dimension of the plot and the term o*uis¢, reflects the magnitude of the difference dimension. The conflict of interest is high when the difference dimension is the larger of the two and commonality of interest is high when the sum dimension is larger. This representation also suggests that the IC index is appropriate for describing the correspondence of a matrix of any size. Presenting the IC index in terms of variance of sums and differences facilitates relating it to the components of interdependence and to different aspects of control over pair outcomes (cf. next section). Alternatively, the index can be understood according to the following formula, in terms of its relation to the product-moment correlation: 20,408 LQ Gy? Hig A Here the as refer to the standard deviations of the outcomes of the two persons. The bracketed term of the equation is 1.00 when the two as are equal; otherwise it is less than 1.00. In other words, the index reduces the product-moment correlation in proportion to the amount of difference between the dispersions of the two sets of outcomes. Correspondence as a Function of the Components For 2 X 2 matrices it can be shown that the two variance terms in the formula for the index of correspondence are related to the components: Bums = (RC, + FCs)? +(RCy + FC,)? + (BC, +BC,)?] and O sitts =+ [RC geo FC)? + (RCa PCa) te (BC, = BCA These equations indicate the conditions under which correspondence will be positive, negative, or near zero. The IC index will be +1.00; that is, there will be perfect correspondence when the appropriate pairs of RC and FC terms are equal and have the same sign (i.e., FC is concordant with RC) and when the two BC terms are equal and have the same sign (i.e., when there is correspondent MBC). The equations highlight the two sharply different cases of perfect correspondence already noted in Chapter 4, one in which the RC and FC terms are zero and the correspondence is entirely due to the correspondent MBC component and the other in which the BC terms are zero and the correspondence is entirely due to the equal and concordant RC and FC terms. Of course there are various mixtures of the two. Ina similar manner the equations reveal that perfect noncorrespondence may reflect noncorrespondent MBC, equal and discordant RC and FC, or mixtures of the two. Unilateral control (e.g., in which RC, and FC, are equal and large but RC , and FC, are zero) also yields perfect correspondence or noncorrespondence, depending on the concordance or discordance between the first two terms. This can be seen in the lower left panel of Figure 4.2. The value of IC approaches zero as the difference between the paired terms (i.e., RC, and FCs, RC; and FC 4, and BC, and BC) become large or, to put the same point differently, as one of the terms becomes small in relation to the other. This includes the case of the intermediate degrees of correspondence in the MBC component in which one person is indifferent to the BC exercised over him. It also includes cases approaching pure MFC (the BRC terms are small) and pure BRC (the MFC terms are small). The generalization to be drawn here is that neither the cooperative nor the competitive interests in the dyad can predominate unless the various “paired’’ component weights in the equations are equal in magnitude. Computational Form. The following formula for IC is more convenient than the one above for computing the value of the index: 2(RC,FC, + RC,FC, + BC,BC;) IC = RC,2 + FC,? + RC,? + FC,2 + BC,2 + BC,” Effect on Correspondence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions: The Frontier Values Again we must take note of how the two persons’ experience of a property of their relationship may be partly determined by how they act within the context of the matrix. If their actions result in their encountering only limited portions of the matrix, an index characterizing the entire matrix may not be an appropriate predictor of that experience. The IC index takes account of the total set of pairs of outcomes available to the two persons. One might argue that only the higher values for each person should be considered. The assumption would be that conflict of interest ordinarily develops only with respect to most preferred outcomes. People do not quarrel over what to do about a set of options none of them wants or has to take. So perhaps the index of correspondence should be especially sensitive to the relations between the outcomes for the cells that are most (or more) preferred by each person. (Of course, under special circumstances, the two persons may “lock-in” on some set of options that are considerably inferior to the best, in which case their experience of conflict might be determined by the properties of the pairs of suboptimal outcomes. This observation highlights the fact that the adjustment in the index of correspondence proposed below is based on particular assumptions about behavior and process that may not be warranted in all cases.) The problem at hand is illustrated by Matrices III and IV in Figure 5.4. Matrix IV has one cell most preferred by both A and B, whereas III showsa difference in their most preferred cells. Thus, even though the IC index is identical for the two (+.59), the conflict about what to do might be higher in III. In fact, it might be even greater than in Matrix II in which the difference dimension is larger in relation to the sum dimension Matrix I Matrix II Matrix III Matrix IV A's outcomes B’s outcomes IC 1s = Sk ICs —= 260 Le = 45> (Ce ee Figure 5.4 Illustration of the two dimensions reflected in the index of correspondence. too KT Sess, Ke Sa eee, Il (IC = +.33); the reason is that the same cell is most preferred by both persons in Matrix II. These considerations might suggest limiting our attention to only those cells that each person most prefers, perhaps computing an IC index only for them. A counterargument, however, suggests the wisdom of some middle course. In the plot for Matrix III the location of the two upper right pairs in relation to the lower left pairs (which enter into the IC index) is probably not totally irrevelant to the amount of conflict the matrix will create. The lower pairs provide a context within which both upper pairs are likely to appear pretty good to both persons and the difference between them may seem insignificant. Thus, although we might want our index to take special account of the upper right pairs, we would not want to disregard completely their location in the total distribution. Following this reasoning, we suggest that IC might be corrected by taking account of the magnitude of o”4i¢¢, computed only for the ‘frontier.” This is the subset of pairs left over after all ““dominated”’ pairs are excluded. A “dominated” pair is one for which there can be found at least one other pair that both persons prefer (or one person prefers another pair and the second person is indifferent between the two). The dominated pairs are shown in Figure 5.4 as filled circles and the frontier pairs, as open circles. In addition to computing o7um, and o4i¢¢, for the entire set of points sits is also computed for the frontier subset. The two o7yi4;, terms are then combined and the resulting value is used as the o%yi;, terms in computing the index. We refer to this corrected index as IC*. The question exactly how the two o°4;r,, terms should be combined, that is, what relative weights they should be given, is probably to be answered on empirical rather than logical grounds. What is desired is a characterization of the index that is maximally predictive of such phenomena as degree of perceived and experienced conflict in the relationship. For now we consider the consequences of a simple averaging in which the two terms are weighted equally. In general, compared with the uncorrected IC values, the corrected IC* values for matrices near the center of the scale are shifted toward the closer extreme end. This can be seen by reference to Figures 5.3 and 5.4. The shifting is greater for matrices in the correspondent half of the scale, the reason being that the frontier values there generally constitute a smaller subset of the entire matrix. IC* for pure MFC is +.33 and IC* for the matrix at the very center of the MBC continuum is also +.33. An important consequence of the correction is seen in Figure 5.4 in which it will be observed that by the corrected index Matrix III is slightly less correspondent than Matrix II and markedly less correspondent than Matrix IV. Effect of the Components on the Frontier. Let us consider now the effect of the interdependence components on the value of IC* by analyzing the manner in which they determine the shape of the frontier. We have already seen how correspondent MBC, indicated by both BC , and BC, as positive or both as negative, contributes to high overall correspondence. We have also seen how noncorrespondent MBC, indicated by a difference in signs between BC, and BC;, contributes to overall noncorrespondence. When we examine the degree of conflict existing at the frontier points, we find that there is an important difference between the two similar sign cases. It is the concordance or discordance of the MBC term with the BRC and MFC terms that affects correspondence by affecting the shape of the frontier. This effect can be shown for the 2 x 2 matrix, although we must admit uncertainty about its generalizability to larger matrices. Figure 5.5 employs a simple scheme to show the location in the resultant matrix of the various components. To simplify the illustration we treat the weights of all the components as equal in value and use Ri =RC,=RC,;, F =FC,=FC;, B =BC, = BC,,.and.0 to. stand: for zero. What we are interested in is whether the largest sum occurs in one cell along with a small difference between the outcomes of A and B (a correspondent frontier) or whether it occurs in two cells with a sizable AY VA Case III Case VI Are VAVA VE VA VAVA WAa Case VII Case VIII Case IX Figure 5.5 Effect of positive versus negative correspondent MBC on differences at the frontier. difference favoring A in one instance and B in the other (a noncorrespondent frontier). When both R and F are present and both are positive (Case I), they make the sum largest in the a,b, cell and the difference there small; the frontier therefore consists of one point. Adding positive and correspondent MBC (Case II) only increases for both persons the advantage of the a,b, cell in relation to the other cells. Adding negative and correspondent MBC (Case III) adds two points to the frontier set, but in neither case will the difference in outcomes be large. When R and F are both present and F is negative (Case IV), they yield a constant-sum game (RK and F being equal). The addition of positive and correspondent MBC (Case V) leaves a,b, and a,b, as the cells with the largest sums and also with the smallest differences—a no-conflict frontier. In contrast, the addition of negative and correspondent MBC (Case VI) converts cells a,b, and a,b, into those with the largest sums, and these have large differences, one favoring A and the other favoring B. Thus negative and correspondent MBC creates a frontier characterized by conflict. The remaining cases in Figure 5.5 show that this same effect occurs when F is absent. Again, positive and correspondent MBC maintains a nonconflict frontier and negative and correspondent MBC creates a frontier characterized by conflict. The reader can readily demonstrate for himself that the same is true when only F is present. The generalization suggested by these examples is that if the R and F factors are discordant or unequal in magnitude, the degree of conflict at the frontier will depend on whether the correspondent MBC term is concordant or discordant with them. When R = F and they are concordant, the orientation (sign) of the correspondent MBC term has little effect, but when F and R are discordant or greatly different in size, the orientation of the MBC term has a large effect on the frontier. This result may be compared with that in the section dealing with the index of dependence. In both cases the concordance-discordance of the MBC term plays no role in the index based on the total matrix. (Here IC depends wholly on the BRC-MFC concordance and the correspondence in the MBC component.) In both cases, however, the concordance— discordance of the MBC term has an important effect on that part of the matrix that, granting certain plausible assumptions about behavior and process, the persons are most likely to experience. CONTROL OVER PAIR OUTCOMES In the analysis of degree of correspondence we distinguish two pair scores, the sum and the difference. The proposed index of correspondence reflects the relative degree to which these scores vary as the two persons move over the domain of cells in the matrix. We now consider the degree of control exercised over them by the two persons. As We discuss later, this control figures prominently in the problem-solving and negotiation processes that occur in the dyad. One of the important consequences of the location of a pattern on the MFC-MBC dimension (Figure 4.3) is the manner in which the two persons control the pair outcomes; for example, the FC and BC components determine whether the satisfaction of the common interest (represented by the sum score) depends solely on one person’s actions, on the sum of their respective actions, or on their joint and coordinated action. The problem can be illustrated by Matrix lin Figure 5.6 which portrays a threat game. The sum and difference scores are indicated in separate derived matrices. It is clear in this case, which happens to be the most extreme, that person B totally controls the variance in the sums whereas A totally controls the variance in the differences. In less clear cases, as in Matrix II, it is possible to calculate the relative degree of control the two exercise over the two scores. An analysis can be made of the components of the sum and difference matrices in the same way that we have analyzed the components of the individual score matrices. It is apparent in Matrix II that the two persons jointly control the sum score but that each separately controls part of the difference score. AS ae ai uemras ae Individual scores Sum Difference (A — B) Individual scores Sum Difference (A — B) Figure 5.6 Control over sum and difference. In 2 Xx 2 matrices the degree of control each person exercises over the sum and difference scores and the degree of control they jointly exercise can be readily calculated from the components of the matrix. This can be seen by referring again to the equations for the variance of the two pair scores: (ane = [(RC , +FC ,)? + (RC, + FC))* + (BG, +BC,)7] and O ditts, = ae LORCA FC ,)* + (RC PC)" IBC = Bes] The first of the three terms in each equation specifies A’s control over the sum and difference. Similarly, the second term specifies B’s control and the third term specifies their joint control. Thus for Matrix I in Figure 5.6 (RC, +FC,;)? =0, (RCs +FC,)? =144, and (BC, +BC,)? =0, which reflect the fact that the sole contributor to variance in the sum is person B. Similarly (RC, —FC,)? =144, (RCs —FC,)? =0, and (BC, —BC,)? =0, which reflect person A’s total control over the difference score. In Matrix II (BC, +BC;)? =36, where both (RC, + FC,)? and (RC, + FC,)? =0, indicating that the sum score is entirely controlled by their joint moves (in a manner analogous to behavior control). The shared control (and absence of joint control) over the difference is indicated by (RC, — FC,)? = (RC,-— FC,)? =16 and (BC, — BC,)? =0. These examples make it clear that the pair outcomes may be controlled in quite different ways in different matrices. Four patterns can be distinguished: 1. Differential Control. One person controls the sum and the other controls the difference. This is epitomized by the threat game (Matrix I in Figure 5.6) in which B determines how much the pair gets and A determines the allocation of the total outcomes between the two. If B does not like A’s division, his only recourse is a threat to modify the total score; hence the labels for the two positions as “allocator’’ and “‘threatener.”’ 2. Unilateral Control. One person controls both scores as shown in Matrix I of Figure 5.7. This occurs with unilateral dependence; the partner is dependent on the person who controls the two pair scores. 3. Joint Control. The pair jointly controls both scores. As shown in Matrix Il of Figure 5.7, this is an effect on the pair scores analogous to behavior control. 4. Shared Control. Each person independently controls part of each score (Matrix III of Figure 5.7). There may also be mixed cases, as in Matrix II (Figure 5.6), in which they exercise joint control over the sum but share control over the difference. By reference to the equations for the sums and differences the reader can determine the necessary conditions for the 2 x 2 case (in terms of the relative magnitudes and intermeshing of the components) for any of these patterns to exist. The analysis of control relates to our earlier discussion (page 103) of the problems that each person faces because of his dependence. To the degree that there is variance in the sum (i.e., with high correspondence) there is a problem for the pair or group which concerns the common interest and can be described as one of obtaining high joint outcomes. Exactly how that problem must be solved depends on who controls the sum, whether one or both. If both have control, then whether it is joint or shared is important. If joint, coordination is the means to high joint outcomes; if shared, the exchange of their respective contributions is the means to the common end. Matrix I: Unilateral control Individual scores Matrix II: Joint control Individual scores Matrix III: Shared control (PDG) Individual scores Difference (A — B) Figure 5.7 Some of the types of control over sum and difference. Under high noncorrespondence, as epitomized by the constant-sum game, there is no group problem but only those of the individuals. This means that there is considerable variance in the difference score and each person’s problem is to obtain an outcome advantageous to hiniself or, if that is not possible, one that is minimally disadvantageous. Again, the solution depends on who controls the difference score and how it is done. If the control is shared, each person can merely act in the way that yields the difference most favorable to himself and hope that his partner will not. If the control is joint, the problem is one of preventing the partner’s coordination while somehow managing a coordination favorable to one’s self. In both cases the person is faced with the necessity of getting as much as he can for himself and of protecting himself from his partner’s actions. In the case of intermediate correspondence there is a mixture of group and individual problems. It seems reasonable to assume that in general the group, by virtue of the common interest, will find it useful to help members jointly to achieve solutions to their respective problems; that is, the pair will probably take on the individual problems so that they will not interfere with the solution of the common problem. Thus both members of the dyad have an interest in obtaining maximum joint outcomes, but they are also likely to be concerned with allocation or justice which can be viewed as derivative of the individual problems present under high noncorrespondence. Just as in the zero-sum, perfectly competitive relationship, each person is concerned with (a) getting as much as he can and (b) protecting himself, so it is true in the mixed situation that the pair has an interest in protecting each person and at the same time keeping him contented or happy (helping him to feel that he is getting as much as he can). Systems of justice can be viewed as having to do with (a) providing each person with security against the lower end of his outcome scale and (b) providing him with a satisfactory or equitable level of gain. These implications of control over sum and difference scores appear again in our considerations when, in Chapter 10, the negotiation process in dyads is analyzed. The manner in which the sum is controlled determines the process of selecting among the frontier values, i.e., those among which wise participants will attempt to negotiate an agreement. The control of the difference scores figures importantly in the positions from which this bargaining will be conducted and in the threats available to the negotiators. OPTIMAL PATTERNS AND CHOICE DILEMMAS At several points in Chapter 4 the question of the optimal versions of certain patterns such as the PDG was raised. This question brings up two interrelated issues, the first concerning the optimal number of components and the second the optimal ratio of weights for a given set of components. We consider the optimal number of components first. In exploring the three-component matrices, we wondered whether any of the important patterns noted among the two-component matrices would be enhanced by the addition of the third component; for example, is there a better version of Prisoner’s Dilemma or Chicken than those in Figures 4.5 and 4.3? This question concerns the effect of adding a third component to the two-component patterns; specifically, whether the effect is to sharpen or blur the properties of these patterns. If we explore the regions of the domain adjacent to these patterns, we will observe that each pattern is maintained only so long as the third component is small; for example, the Battle of the Sexes is described in Figure 4.3 with a BRC:MFC:MBC ratio of 0:4:8. (This is a shorthand expression for the following: IRC,| = [RCg| = 0; IFC,| = IFC,! =4; IBC,| =|BC,! =8.) The similar matrices with a ratio of 2:3:7 possess the basic properties of the Battle of the Sexes, but the matrices witha ratio of 3:3:6 do not, nor do matrices in which the proportion of BRC is even higher. This fact is illustrated in Figure 5.8 which shows the original matrix along with the three possible variations produced by adding BRC in the three possible concordant relations with the other two components. In the 0:4:8 matrix each person prefers doing D while his partner does C but his second choice is the opposite combination. Their least preferred outcomes occur when both play D. This set of preferences, hence the basic properties of the relationship, is maintained with the 2:3:7 ratio but is lost in one respect or another with the 3:3:6 ratio. Even with the 2:3:7 ratio one or another property becomes blurred as the gaps between scores at the successive preference levels are shortened and lengthened. Thus the addition of the third component, the BRC, first blurs the structure of the relationship (at low values) and then destroys it altogether (at higher values). This point can be made by logical argument, as shown in Figure 5.9 for the PDG. The basic PDG pattern is described in the upper half of the EWA LAVA 0:4:8 (BRC : MFC : MBC) WA VA, VAVAleaVAVARVAVA eh Ed HAA VAVA VANS VAVA PASC} aT) or S716 Figure 5.8 Modifications in Battle of the Sexes with the addition of BRC. figure where BRC and MFC are combined in a discordant relationship. The magnitudes of the RC and FC components are portrayed by the letters R and F (where F is greater than R) and 0 stands for zero. In the resulting pattern the four values for each person are ordered in magnitude with (F +R) >F >R >0. In the lower half of the figure MBC is added in a concordant orientation to the basic PDG pattern; the increments are indicated by B. We then consider how large these increments may be without destroying the original rank order of the four cell values for each person which defines the PDG; that is, what constraints must be placed on B if in the new pattern PDG’ it is still true that (F + R) > (F + B) > (R + B) > 0. The answer is clear from the first comparison: for (F + R) > (F + B) it is necessary that R > B. Thus the MBC component must be smaller in magnitude than the BRC component if the PDG pattern is to be maintained. A similar conclusion is reached if we add correspondent MBC in a discordant orientation to the original pattern or if we add noncorrespondent MBC to the PDG. (A further constraint is placed on the magnitude of B by the usual criteria for the ordering of the cellsums in the PDG: 2F >(F +R +0) > 2R. For this to be true when correspondent BC is added concordantly or discordantly F must exceed R + 2B which requires that B be less than 1/2(F — R).) The above conclusion is reached for all the unequal ratio, twocomponent patterns mentioned earlier, that is, for the PDG (MFC + BRC), MDG (MFC + BRC), Chicken (MFC + MBC), Battle of (EPR) SF SRS 0 For (F+ R) > (F +B) > (R+B)>0 R must be greater than B Figure 5.9 Analysis of the effects of adding MBC to the Prisoner’s Dilemma game. the Sexes (MFC + MBC), Hero (MBC + BRC), and Martyr (MBC + BRC). In all these cases the ordinal relations among the outcomes present in the two-component version are maintained with the addition of the third factor only if that factor is smaller in magnitude than the lesser of the original factors. Thus, for example, Figure 5.10 shows that BRC can be added to Chicken without changing the basic pattern if it is smaller in magnitude than the MBC component in the orginal version. The preceding analysis suggests that the two-component versions of any one of the “‘classic’’ games lies at the center of the subdomain of patterns satisfying the rank-order requirements of that game. As we add the third component we move toward the boundary of the domain and beyond a certain magnitude the additional component shifts the pattern into a different subdomain altogether. Similarly, in considering the patterns generated by successive shifts in the ratios of the two components (see Figures 4.3 through 4.5), it seemed that a given game was best presented by an intermediate ratio (e.g., BRC and MFC ina ratio of 4:8 for the PDG). Can it be asserted, then, that the two-component patterns with certain ratios are optimal versions of the various games? A first argument in support of this assertion can be made from the perspective of the confusability of various patterns. If a particular game is defined by a certain preference ordering among the person’s four outcomes, then that game exists in its clearest form when the differences in outcomes between successive members of the preference order are equal; for example, in Figure 5.8 the 0:4:8 version of the Battle of the Sexes has each person’s preferences equally spaced. This preference ordering of first, ownD, other’s C, second, own C, other’s D, third, bothC, and fourth, both D, is represented by the regular descending outcome sequence of 12, 8, 4, and 0. As we have noted the addition of BRC tends to destroy this ordering; for example, mapping it onto the irregular outcome sequence of 12, 7,3, and 2 witha small amount of BRC and wholly eliminating certain aspects of the order with larger amounts (e.g., the sequences 12, 6,3, and 3 or 9, 9, 6, and 0). A glance at Figure 4.3 will also make it clear that the 0:4:8 Battle of the Sexes is the particular two-component version that yields the regular, evenly spaced sequence of outcomes. (Compare the 4:8 Battle of the Sexes with the 2:10 pattern below it.) The argument here is essentially a perceptual one. In terms of the clarity of the person’s preference ordering, which version of a given game is least confusable with adjacent games? It seems reasonable to assume that if the outcome difference representing a given step in a person’s preference order is small, he will occasionally overlook it or regard it as unimportant. If so, on these occasions he will be locating himself in a different interdependence pattern. The patterns least susceptible to such errors or confusions are the two-component patterns with two-to-one ratios, as indicated in Figures 4.3 through 4.5. (The threat game represents a different case and is not to be included in this generalization.) These “best” patterns are, of course, those identified in Rapoport and Guyer’s analysis of matrices in which each person’s preferences are described simply in terms of rank order. The implication of the present discussion is that the best patterns are those in which these ranks represent evenly spaced outcome values. Acuteness of Choice Dilemmas A second argument can be made for the optimality of the twocomponent, two-to-one patterns. This is based on a consideration of the nature of the choice dilemma that confronts an actor ina given game. The basic idea is that the number and magnitude of components affect the acuteness or sharpness of the dilemma a person faces. Again, the dilemmas seem to be most acute for the particular two-component patterns mentioned above. Consider the PDG. Referring to the top portion of Figure 5.9, the difference (F +R) —F is often referred to as the ‘‘temptation” to make the D response; R — 0, as the “risk” involved in making the C response; and F —R, as the “gain” to be achieved by cooperative exchange of C responses. In the simple two-component PDG “temptation” and “‘risk’”’ are both equal to R and “gain” is equal toF — R. WithF = 2R (as in the 4:8 version) all three terms are equal. In other words, temptation = risk = gain when the four outcomes (F + R, F, R, and 0) are equally spaced, and this is true only for the 1:2 versions of the PDG. The dilemma in the PDG is that you have one action that is better no matter what your partner does (represented by the temptation and avoidance of the risk), but if you take that action and your partner does likewise, you do more poorly than if you both had done otherwise (represented by loss of the gain). It seems reasonable to assume that the dilemma is most acute when these two considerations exactly offset each other, that is, when the temptation (and risk avoidance) incentive favoring the D response is exactly as strong as the gain incentive favoring the C response. It will be clear by now that this is true for the 4:8 version of PDG. It may be asked why it is necessary for the temptation (F + R) — R to be equal to the risk R — 0. (This equality requires that MBC be zero.) The answer lies in the unbalancing of one side of the dilemma that their inequality introduces. The side of the dilemma favoring D is made up of both approach and avoidance motivation—to achieve the benefits represented by the temptation and to avoid the penalties represented by the risk. The optimal (4:8) version of the PDG has the two incentive properties represented equally in the set of considerations counterposed to the gain. Other versions accentuate one of these properties in relation to the other; for example, in the lower part of Figure 5.9, with the concordant addition of MBC, the temptation is reduced and the risk is increased. The reader can determine for himself that a discordant addition of MBC increases the temptation and decreases the risk. The addition of noncorrespondent MBC increases temptation and decreases risk for one person but has the opposite effect for the other person. Thus, with the added MBC component, a person’s choice becomes primarily defined by the temptation versus the gainor by the risk versus the gainor one way for one person and the other way for his partner. A similar argument can be made for the game of Chicken—that the 0:8:4 ratio creates the most acute dilemma for each person. Here, however, there is the interesting special fact that the dilemma facing an actor depends in part on the acuteness of the conflict he can create, by his choice, for his partner. Chicken is shown, schematically and in several versions, in Figure 5.10. The basic game pattern is defined by the following preference order: first, own D and other’s C; second, both C; third, ownC and other’s D; and fourth, both D. This order can be constructed by using only MFC + MBC, MFC being the larger term (Matrices I and II). In these cases, in which BRC is absent, if required to make a choice without knowing his partner’s choice the person has no clear basis for deciding betweenC and D. If, however, he knows what his partner has chosen, the MBC term provides a basis for choice. Similarly, if he can choose first and make his choice known to his partner, he can provide him with a basis for choice. The latter is a particularly attractive possibility because by choosing D and letting his partner know it he can provide him with an incentive to choose C, which would result in his own highest outcome. It is because of this possibility that Chicken is described as a preemption game. Preempting the D action—taking it irrevocably and notifying the partner of this fact—is a means of attaining one’s best outcomes. Chicken is a special preemption game, however, (others are Battle of the Sexes and Hero). As suggested by the situation from which it takes its name it provides a setting in which a person may demonstrate his courage. This reflects the fact that the dilemma for the prospective preemptor is whether to play it (relatively) safe withC or to take a chance withD. Foran early commitment to D to constitute a display of courage it is necessary that the payoff matrix have two properties: (a) There must be no basis for choice other than the differential riskiness of the two alternatives. This means that no other interpretation can be placed on the D choice than that MFC + MBC Matrix | Matrix II Matrix III eG VAVA a WV VAVA 0:8:4 0:10:2 0:6:6 Matrix IV Matrix V Matrix VI Jay es Ay, VAVA Ave VA 1:7:4 BET ES: 3:6:3 Figure 5.10 The game of Chicken and several variations. of risk taking. This precludes an RC favoring the D choice because other people might simply infer that its choice represents what is on the average, the better bet. (b) There must be no clear basis for predicting the partner’s response to the preemptive move. This means that the preemptor must be taking his action under maximal uncertainty. If made with assurance that the partner will reciprocate the D, we would describe the preemptive move as foolish, and if made with assurance the partner will respond with C we would simply describe it as obvious or “showboating.” The latter creates the interesting point in the analysis. Uncertainty for the preemptor depends on the acuteness of the conflict in which his action places the other party. Person A’s uncertainty about the outcome of his preemptive action will be maximal if the other person has no obvious response to make but rather is placed in sharp conflict between complying and resisting; for example, in Matrix I, Figure 5.10, ifA preemptively chooses D, the partner can get either 4 or 0. His conflict about what to do would seem to depend on the magnitudes of these outcomes in relation to the8 that might have been attained with mutual C choices. The 4 is considerably lower than 8 but also considerably better than 0. His conflict will be marked. In contrast, faced with the same situation in Matrix IL, after comparing the 2 with the 10, he is likely to conclude that he might as well take the 0. In contrast, in Matrix III he is likely to conclude that because the 6 is what he might have obtained anyway it is clearly preferable to 0. In the last two cases his conflict is less than for Matrix I. This reasoning suggests that the partner’s uncertainty about what to do is greatest when B falls exactly half way between F and 0. Thus it should be true that F — B = B — 0 or that F = 2B. If we impose the additional condition suggested by (a), that there be no RC for the preemptor, it must further be true that (F + B) —F =F —B. Thus, the two conditions are best satisfied when the four ordered outcomes are evenly spaced from highest to lowest. The lower matrices in Figure 5.10 shows that the addition of BRC concordant with the MFC disrupts the equal spacing.

