Logical Analysis of the Transformation Processes Operations on Own and Other’s Outcomes, 140 Maximize Other’s Outcomes, 141 Maximize Both Own and Other’s Outcomes, 142 Maximize Own Advantage, 144 Minimize Difference, 145 Nonlinear Transformations Involving the Comparison Level, 148 Transpositions of Cells in the Given Matrix, 151 Double Transpositions, 154 Averaging over Successive Occasions, 155 The Consequences of Sequential Transformations, 156 The Choice Among Sequential Transformations, 159 Sequential Transformations in the Service of Outcome Transformations, 163 The Consequences of Repeated Play, 163 of ABSTRACT This chapter examines the shifts in matrix pattern generated by applying various mathematical operations and sequential rules to given patterns. Only certain plausible transformations, corresponding to common values and temporal concepts, are investigated. These include cases in which the person (a) gives some direct weight to his partner’s outcomes in his decision-making criteria (outcome transformations), (b) attempts to be the first or second to act on a given occasion out of regard for how the choices are changed for the second actor (transpositional transformations), and (c) adopts a policy governing his successive choices over a series of interactions in the given matrix (sequential transformations). The several transformations are analyzed for the effect they have on the patterns of interdependence and, therefore, such things as the components of the pattern, the correspondence or noncorrespondence of outcomes, and each person’s basis for choice. We now consider how a particular 2 x 2 matrix can be transformed and the consequences of the various transformations for the pattern of interdependence that results. Transformations are made possible by the pattern of outcomes in the given matrix. Psychologically, they are the ways in which a person can reevaluate or reconceptualize the given matrix. In doing so, he no longer responds to his own outcomes in each cell. Instead, he views these outcomes in the contexts provided by his partner’s outcomes and by past and future actions and interactions within the relationship. When a person takes account of his partner’s outcomes, he is able to adopt new criteria for making decisions and evaluating their consequences; for example, he can make it his goal to cause both sets of outcomes to be as high as possible. In effect, by adopting this criterion he is acting as if the matrix were something different than the given one. We refer to these new criteria as social or personal values and describe this type of transformation as an outcome transformation. A second possible consequence of considering the total pattern of outcomes is that the person can recognize the importance of the timing of events in any interaction; for example, the pattern of outcomes may indicate that a person who “goes first’ is more likely to get a high outcome than one who waits and lets the other go first. The person who recognizes the benefits of “preemption” and acts on this insight is effectively operating within a different matrix than the given one—a matrix within which the choices for the second actor are redefined and in which the values reflect a transposition of those in the given matrix. We refer to this modification of the given matrix as a transpositional transformation. When a person takes account of past and future interchanges, he can adopt a policy of varying his choices over successive occasions; for example, when he and his partner obtain their respective highest outcomes from different combinations of actions, an alternation of his choices over successive times may make it possible for both equally, though only occasionally, to enjoy these high outcomes. In considering such policies, the person is in effect making choices within a new matrix, one in which the alternatives are various sequential rules and the outcomes are the long run (or average) consequences of their various combinations. This kind of modification of the given matrix is described as a sequential transformation. Logically, transformations can be represented by three different operations on the given matrix, corresponding to the three transformational phenomena outlined: (a) mathematical operations on own and other’s outcomes corresponding to various outcome transformations; (b) transpositions of cells in the matrix corresponding to the consequences of preemptive action; and (c) averaging values over portions of the given matrix representing the consequences of combinations of sequential rules. We now consider each of these in turn. We analyze the way in which each of these operations affects the properties of the given matrix; that is, how the effective (transformed) matrix relates to the given one. In Chapter 7 we consider the more specific consequences of these transformations and treat the actor as a policy setter, choosing among different transformations and evaluating their consequences. We also determine how, for various patterns, certain transformations induce easy and mutually satisfying decisions, whereas others either worsen or do not improve intrapersonal and interpersonal conflict. OPERATIONS ON OWN AND OTHER’S OUTCOMES The research of McClintock and his colleagues, discussed more fully in Chapter 7, suggests that people may have preferences not only with respect to their own outcomes but also to their partner’s (other’s) outcomes, the joint outcomes (own and other’s), and the relative outcomes LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS (one’s advantage in relation to the other’s outcome). The mathematical Operations we consider here include these three criteria along with a fourth that relates to justice—a preference for minimal difference between own and other’s outcomes. Maximize Other’s Outcomes The simplest social criterion that a person may apply in his actions is the altruistic one of maximizing his partner’s outcomes (max other). In the effective matrix his outcomes are those of his partner in the given matrix. It is apparent that he now becomes subject to the same sources of variation in his outcomes as his partner in the given matrix, except that their meaning is somewhat changed for him. Assuming that B adopts the max other criterion (using primes to indicate the component weights of the effective matrix), then BC’;=BC,, but RC’,;=FC, and FC’;=RC,,. In short, what was fate control over A now is reflexive control for B and what was reflexive control for A now is fate control over B. This will be intuitively obvious to the reader: if I totally identify with my child and his outcomes become my own, then ways in which I exercised fate control over him become ways in which I affect my own outcomes, and ways in which he exercised reflexive control over himself now become ways in which he exercises fate control over me. It will also be intuitively clear that if B unilaterally makes the max other transformation (while A maintains an interest exclusively in his own outcomes), the effective matrix becomes perfectly correspondent. As A’s given outcomes are larger or smaller, so are B’s effective ones. This follows from the fact that RC, becomes FC’;, FC, becomes RC’;, and BC, becomes BC’s. The reader will recall that the index of correspondence is +1 when RC, = FCs, RCg = FC,, and BC, = BC,z. If both persons adopt the max other criterion, the various components simply switch places as indicated by the arrows in Figure 6.1. There is no change in the degree of correspondence because the pairs of RC and FC terms and the two BC terms remain the same. The pattern, however, may change in degree of interdependence as the magnitude of RC relative to the other components increases or decreases. The consequences of these shifts can be seen most readily by referring to figures in Chapter 4. The interchange of the RC and FC terms means that matrices in Figure 4.5 reverse their position in relation to the horizontal medial axis of the array. Thus PDG and the matrix directly below it exchange positions as do MDG and the one directly below it. The three matrices on the horizontal axis (competitive, threat, and cooperative) remain unchanged. In Figures 4.3 and 4.4 the consequence of the RC-FC interchange is to exchange beComponents Given matrix: RCy, RCg; FCy, FCp; BC,, BCpz Transformed matrix: RCo RCA Fei, Eee, BC,, BC, Figure 6.1 Relation of transformed components to given components with mutual max other transformation. tween the two figures matrices located in similar positions. Thus Chicken becomes Martyr and vice versa; Battle of the Sexes becomes Hero and vice versa, and, of course, MFC becomes BRC and vice versa. In brief, mutual max other leaves the degree of correspondence unchanged, but if the initial balance of RC and FC is unequal it shifts the matrix up or down on the independence-interdependence scale. The latter effect is caricatured by the pair of persons who, on becoming closely identified with each other, find themselves being wholly affected (MFC) by what earlier had been independently controlled sources of satisfaction (BRC). An important aspect of the max other transformation is that a person may have greater RC than before. This depends, of course, on his partner’s FC and how it compares with his own given RC. In patterns such as the Battle of the Sexes the criterion provides a person with RC where he had none before. Maximize Both Own and Other’s Outcomes A more complex but also more common criterion is that of maximizing both one’s own and one’s partner’s outcomes, referred to as max joint. The person can give different weight to the two sets of outcomes by, for example, placing more emphasis on his own than his partner’s. Considering the simplest case in which he weights them equally, the component weights for the transformed matrix become (for B): RC’, = RCs + FC, FC’; = FC, AP RC, and BC’, = BC, Tr BC, In other words, added to B’s own components are the appropriate ones of his partner. The same is true for A’s components. LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS In mutual use of the max joint criterion the following equalities prevail: REY = FC’; = RC, ar FC, FC’, = RC’, = RC, + FC, and BOYS =BC'5 =BC, + BC, These are summarized in Figure 6.2, which shows the pair of given terms combined to form each transformed term. The equalities between pairs of terms in the transformed pattern show that the relationship is perfectly correspondent. This is intuitively obvious. If both persons take equal account of both sets of given outcomes, their respective transformed outcomes will be identical in each cell. Components Given matrix: RC,4, RCp; FCy, FCy; BC,, BC, Transformed matrix: RC,, RCp; BC FCz; BC,, BC, Figure 6.2 Relation of transformed components to given components with mutual max joint transformation. Intuitively, it seems that unilateral adoption of the max joint criterion will increase the correspondence between the outcomes of the two persons. Thus, as he applies this criterion, B’s outcomes vary to a greater extent than originally with the same factors (A’s choices, B’s choices, their joint choices) as do A’s outcomes. In general, this is true. There are exceptions, however, that can be understood by referring to the case of perfect correspondence shown in Figure 6.3. Although in the original matrix IC = +1.00, the IC for the transformed matrix is +.80. The reason is that the variance in A’s outcomes increases sharply. Because the IC is equal to the correlation reduced by any inequality between the dispersions of the two sets of outcomes, the increased variance in A’s outcomes reduces the correspondence. The psychological meaning is that although A andB still share the same preference ordering for the four possible events, the correspondence between the preferences is reduced by the fact that A cares so much more than B that better outcomes be attained. A rough generalization about the unilateral use of the max joint criterion is that it increases the degree of correspondence if the correspondence is not too high in the given matrix. Although the mutual max joint transformation always yields perfect correspondence, it has drastically different effects on the degree of interdependence, depending on the given matrix. As was true of the max other criterion, the use of max joint can produce RC where there was none originally. Illustrations are provided by MFC, Battle of the Sexes, and Chicken. The threat game becomes a pattern of unilateral dependence in which B is in control of both RC, and FC ,; this simply reflects B’s control over the sum score in the orginal matrix. Perfectly noncorrespondent games have no variance at all in their transformed versions, which is another way of noting that perfectly noncorrespondent games are constant-sum patterns. Given matrix Transformed matrix M f Figure 6.3 Matrix for which the max joint transformation reduces degree of correspondence. Maximize Own Advantage This competitive value transformation can be represented in its simplest form by the algebraic difference (own-other). We refer to it as the max rel criterion, remembering that the difference (meaning ‘own relative advantage’’) is positive if own outcome is larger than other’s and is negative if other’s outcome is larger than own. The components of the transformed matrix are calculated by making proper subtractions among the terms for the given matrix: RC’, =s RC, a. FC, RC’; = RC, =z FC, FC) = FC, = RCs, FC’, = FC, = RC, Be. = BC, = BC, BC’; = BC, Foe BC, It will be seen that RC’, = —FC’,;, FC’, = —RC’;, and BC’, = —BC’,. LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS Thus the matrix resulting from a mutual max rel transformation always has a perfectly noncorrespondent pattern. This transformation is, of course, a mirror image of the max joint transformation. Not only does its mutual use lead to noncorrespondence (where max joint leads to correspondence) but its unilateral use generally leads to increased noncorrespondence (just as unilateral max joint generally results in increased correspondence). The exceptions to this generalization are similar to those applying to max joint usage. Unilateral max rel use increases the noncorrespondence only if the initial degree is not too extreme. The effects of the max rel criterion on interdependence also provide a mirror image of those for max joint. Perfectly correspondent given patterns have no variance in their transformed versions, reflecting their constant-difference property. Thus the correspondent MBC terms drop out for such patterns as Chicken and Hero. For given patterns with noncorrespondent MBC the transformation enhances the term. The threat game again has unilateral dependence, but this time A controls both terms, reflecting his control over the difference scores in the given matrix. Like the other criteria considered so far, max rel can generate RC for a person who has none in the given matrix. Minimize Difference Persons interested in justice might place a negative value on any difference between the outcomes of the two persons. Thus they would attempt to minimize the absolute difference, own-other’s. The larger the difference, the larger the negative transformed value. The relations between the given components and those of the pattern resulting from the min diff transformation are exceedingly complicated: let A= RC, FC, B = FC, — RC; @ = BC (BG; and D =GM,-— GMgs Then RC’, = FC’, =1/4(|A +B +C+2D|+/A —B —C +2D|-|B—A—C+2D| SiC BAD: FC’, = RC’, = 1/4(IA+B+C+2D|-|A—B-—C+2D\+I|IB-A —C+2D!\-!IC —A —B +2D)), and BC’, = BC’; = —1/4 (|A + B +C + 2D| —|A —B —C + 2D|-|B-A-C PSD) Cia p een): Several aspects of the min diff transformation may be noted. The first is that the mutual use of the min diff criterion results in a perfectly correspondent pattern, revealed by the paired equalities among the terms of the transformed pattern. Second, the grand means of the two sets of given outcomes affect the components of the transformed matrix. This, of course, reflects one of the sources of differences between the scores of the two persons. The greater the degree to which one person is generally more favored in the given outcomes of their interaction, the larger the negative outcomes for whomever applies the min diff criterion. Third, a difference between the two persons in their total variance in outcomes contributes to all three components of the transformed pattern. This is apparent from the fact that the first term A +B +C + 2D increases the value of all three transformed components. This term is partly a function of the difference between the sums of the original components of the two persons. The effect of this difference in variance may be offset by the difference between the means, but if the mean difference is close to zero the difference in variance acts to increase all three derived components. The psychological significance is that minimal differences between the two sets of outcomes are possible only if the two persons are affected to about the same degree by the different combinations of their behavior. On the one hand, a person who is greatly pleased by all events in the interaction will inevitably have different given outcomes from his partner who is rather indifferent to all the events (the effect of a mean difference). On the other hand, a person who is highly responsive, with both pleasure and displeasure, to the different events will have different outcomes froma partner who is only mildly responsive (the effect of a variance difference). Fourth, independently of the similarity or dissimilarity between the means and variances of the two persons’ outcomes, the degree of correspondence or noncorrespondence between them affects the components of the transformed pattern. (This is readily determined by comparing noncorrespondent and correspondent ranked-outcome patterns because all such patterns have the same mean and variance.) In Chapter 5 we saw that correspondence is maximal when the pairs of components in the given matrix (RC ,and FCs, RCg and FC ,, BC, and BC) are equal and have the same signs. Noncorrespondence is maximal when the pairs are equal and opposite in sign. Referring to the first equations (page 145), the reader will see that in the first case each of the A, B and C terms is zero; in the second case they have values, respectively, of +2RC,, +2FC,, and +2BC ,. Substituting these values in the equations for the transformed components and, for simplicity, assuming that GM , = GM,, we find that LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS the transformed components are zero for the first case (correspondent given matrix) and nonzero for the second (noncorrespondent given matrix). The first is merely another manifestation of the fact that a perfectly correspondent matrix is also a constant-difference game and there can be no variability from one cell to another in the magnitude of the difference. In contrast, for any degree of difference between GM , and GM, perfectly noncorrespondent matrices have maximal variability among the cells in the magnitude of the difference. aS ES EB SS RG, Figure 6.4 Illustrations of matrices yielding high and low values of RC’, by the min diff transformation. The equations may be examined with respect to the conditions under which a person will have RC in the transformed matrix. If RC ,is large and the other terms are small, RC’, will, of course, be large. Also, as shown in matrix L of Figure 6.4, RC’, will also be high if person A exercises high FC,. In both cases the A term in the formulas is large. There is also a difference between the grand means. For the case in which GM, = GM,g, it can be seen that RC’, is large if the A term is small and B and C are large and equal both in sign and magnitude. This is illustrated in Figure 6.4 by matrix M which yields no RC’, and matrix N which yields a sizable one. The essential components of matrix N, reflecting the B and C terms, are shown in matrix O, which shows that the simple FC and BC combination generates RC’ , despite the absence of RC , in the original matrix. For the case in which RC, = RC,, FC, = FC,, and BC, = BC, the components in the min diff transformed pattern are easy to determine. Under conditions in which GM, = GM,g, the transformed RC’ and FC’ terms are zero and BC’, = BC’, = (RC, — FC,). An illustration is provided by the PDG in Figure 6.5. All such matrices, in which the outcomes are symmetric around a diagonal, yield transformed patterns characterized wholly by correspondent MBC. Given Figure 6.5 Transformation of the PDG by the min diff criterion. Nonlinear Transformations Involving the Comparison Level The preceding transformations bear linear relations to own and/or other's given outcomes. The functions relating the given and the effective outcomes, however, may sometimes be nonlinear; for example, in comparing his own outcomes with those of his partner the person may not find that his resultant satisfaction increases linearly with the (own-other) algebraic difference. Instead, he may experience a great gain in satisfaction as he moves from being just below the partner to being just above him. In the extreme case there is a stepwise or discontinuous transformation, all outcomes below those of the partner being equally negative LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS and all outcomes above, equally positive. As shown in Figure 6.6, if this discontinuous max rel transformation is made by both persons, a given matrix of moderately high correspondence will be transformed into a two-outcome-level matrix of perfect noncorrespondence. This transformation is probably encouraged by experience in win-lose reward systems in which “winner takes all’ and second best gets nothing, no matter how close he comes to winning. M Figure 6.6 Consequences of a discontinuous max rel transformation. More generally, the person’s comparison level (CL) not only defines a zero point for his outcomes—the dividing line between satisfaction and dissatisfaction—but may also introduce a stretching out of the values in that particular region of the scale. Indeed, psychologically, this seems to be the implication of the distinction between satisfactory and unsatisfactory outcomes—that there is a region of discontinuity in the outcome scale. This view of the nonlinear transforming effects of the CL is consistent with Sidney Siegel’s proposal that the level of aspiration be defined as the upper boundary of that region of the objective utility scale in which there is the sharpest rate of change in subjective utility (see Siegel 1957, for references to the evidence in support of this proposal). The nonlinear effect of the CL would be reflected in the given matrix insofar as the CL exists before the present interaction. Thus the experimenter may set outcome goals for one or both players in a game, thereby defining success and producing a stretching of the outcome scale between those values below a goal and those above it. The nonlinear effect would constitute part of the transformation process generating the effective matrix to the extent that the CL is modified in the present relationship by information about the partner’s outcomes. Thus the partner’s generally higher level of outcomes (his higher GM) may raise the person’s outcome aspirations. In the extreme case illustrated in Figure 6.6 each person’s CL is totally defined by the partner’s outcomes. As these examples show, there is a close similarity between the processes underlying CL and the max rel outcome transformation. Whether the CL is externally or internally anchored, the effect of its nonlinear transformation depends ‘on (a) the preceding pattern of interdependence and (b) the levels of CL for the two persons. This is shown in Figure 6.7 in which the given PDG and MDG matrices have been transformed by low, medium, and high CLs. For each transformation the scale has been stretched six points at the CL. The transformed values are deviations from the CL with three points added for the positive and three points subtracted for the negative. The indices of correspondence show that the medium CL decreases noncorrespondence and the low and high CLs increase noncorrespondence (slightly) for the PDG. In contrast, for the MDG pattern the medium CL decreases correspondence, whereas the low and high CLs increase it. Of course, the transformation tends to change the type of pattern as well; for example, the transformed version of the PDG resulting from the high CL no longer satisfies the condition of the original pattern that the joint outcome be highest in the upper left cell. The examples in Figure 6.7 show that the effects of a nonlinear transformation associated with a CL depends on the level of that CL in relation to the values in the matrix and the pattern of the given matrix. These effects occur only for values of the CL that are within the range of values in the matrix. If the CL is outside that range, its “stretching” effect does not modify the pattern of the matrix. SSISSISSI Ss Figure 6.7 Transformations of PDG and MDG by different comparison levels. LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS TRANSPOSITIONS OF CELLS IN THE GIVEN MATRIX This and the next section deal with certain temporal aspects of the interaction. In the present case we consider only the single interaction, defined by the time interval during which both persons enact or become committed to enact items from their respective behavioral repertories. Various possibilities relate to the sequence of their separate actions or decisions as well as to the intercommunication of their actions or decisions. In one extreme case they make their decisions simultaneously and independently, without communication or knowledge of each other’s decisions. In a different case, of special interest here, one person acts and makes that action known to the partner before the latter makes a decision. If, ona given occasion of interaction, one person acts first, the partner is permitted to take account of that action in deciding on his own. In effect, the first action provides the partner with a decision different from the one he would have faced otherwise. This can be described in terms of match or not match, match meaning that he makes the same choice as the first actor and not match meaning that he makes the opposite choice. (By same choice we mean the action with the same subscript as that taken by the partner. Thusa ,is the same choice with respect tob, but the opposite with respect to b,. Some of the examples that follow may be easier to understand if A and B are assumed to have identical sets of behavioral options, but the logic of the analysis does not require this.) This set of events generates a transformed matrix that is simply the given matrix with two cells transposed. We refer to this process as a transpositional transformation. It is illustrated for Chicken in Figure 6.8. Person B’s first action, by providing the ‘match versus not match” alternative to A, transforms the matrix in the manner shown. It is this transpositional transformation that often motivates interdependent persons, depending on the given matrix, to try to act first (preempt) or to have the partner act first (wait). In Chicken B’s interest in acting first is clear. He provides A with RC’, in favor of not matching. If B’s first action has beenb y, this RC’ , works to B’s advantage. The various preemption games derive their name from this fact. An example of a matrix in which a person is motivated to wait and let the partner go first is provided by MFC. As shown in Figure 6.8, by matching B’s first response A can reward B for b, and withhold reward for b,. Thus the successful “waiter” is able to convert his FC to BC. Noncorrespondent MBC in Figure 6.9 provides another case of a person’s gaining from successful waiting. Person B’s first action provides A with RC’, which ensures A a good outcome; B’s reluctance to transform the matrix in this manner is predictable because he becomes unilaterally eS SIN Beds a bate Figure 6.8 Effect of B’s first action on Chicken and MFC. dependent on A in a situation in which FC’; is discordant with RC’,. Transposition has this consequence for all the patterns with dominant noncorrespondent MBC. Correspondent MBC (Figure 6.9) provides each person with an interest in both preemption and waiting. Thus B’s preemption eliminates the common coordination problem, and although it makes him unilaterally dependent on A this may be acceptable because of the concordance between FC’, and RC’ We shall not go into the question of exactly how a person manages successfully to preempt or wait. The transformed matrices are presented here merely to show the logical consequences of preemption. It is important to note that the transpositional transformation occurs only if the partner of the person who acts first knows that the action has actually occurred. The relation of the components in the transformed matrix to those in the given matrix is shown in Figure 6.10. This is for the case in which B has acted first. (By interchanging subscripts Figure 6.10 also describes the relations when A acts first.) It is apparent that transposing cells ina given row will have no effect on the between-row sources of variance (RC, and FC). The other terms are interchanged. The transformation of the BC terms into RC’, and FC’sis illustrated by the MBC matrices in Figure 6.9. LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS Given Transformed A A a Match Not match ; ES ‘ realy Correspondent B MBC io Noncorrespondent Pak Sw > Se Baas Petre Figure 6.9 Effect of B’s first action on correspondent MBC and noncorrespondent MBC. The transformation of FC; into BC’, is illustrated by MFC in Figure 6.8. In the latter, it may seem strange to consider A as having BC over B (BC's) when B has already acted. BC, however, has the same significance in this transformed matrix as it has in any other matrix. In selecting his (first) action, B must realize that his outcome depends on what A does —whether he matches or not. Furthermore, if A has already made a choice in the transformed matrix, in this case, between match and not match, Components Given matrix: RC4, RCg; FCy4, FCp; BC,, BC, Transformed matrix: RC4, RCB; FCA, FC; BCa, BCR Figure 6.10 Relation between components of given matrix and those of the matrix resulting from B’s first action. then B will make his choice according to the BC pattern. We return to this point when considering double transpositions. The transpositional transformation has no effect on the degree of correspondence. It can be seen that any discordant relations between RC-FC pairs are carried forward or translated into noncorrespondent MBC and that noncorrespondent MBC is translated into a discordant relation between RC’, and FC’;. More intuitively, it will be realized that because the pairings of outcome values do not change with transposition the degree of correspondence can undergo no change. Double Transpositions If person A can commit himself to a certain choice in the transformed match versus not match matrix before B acts, then that matrix itself is transformed. This is shown for the PDG in Figure 6.11. The meanings of “match” and “not match” in PDG’ have been spelled out so that we may be clear about the meaning of B’s new alternatives in PDG”. A’s match is equivalent to “I will doa, if you dob, anda,if you dob,.”” His not match means that his actions will be the opposite under these two circumstances. Following A’s preemption of match or not match, B’s choice (assuming that he is willing to act first) now becomes one between “I will do b, if you match and by, otherwise’ and “I will do b, if you match and b,, otherwise.” PDG PDG’ PDG" a, if b, a, if b, Ne if by a, if Bw a Ne match if rate a SoS if aw aN eeEN Figure 6.11 Double transposition of the PDG. The consequences of this double preemption are apparent. In the original PDG each person’s following his RC resulted in both getting less than they might have. PDG' (as generated by B’s simple preemption) does not improve the situation. B would be unlikely to preempt with b, and his b, first choice generates a matching response because of BC’, in PDG’. Matters are different in PDG”, however. Person A can commit himself to LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS match with confidence that B’s response will be b ,, by virtue of RC"s. (For the same reason A will not commit himself at the outset to not match.) The result will be the attainment of the set of outcomes that is as beneficial as possibie to both parties. This analysis is essentially that of Nigel Howard in his metagame theory (1971). It should be viewed as a logical possibility in relation to any pattern of interdependence but not as one that is necessarily to be expected. Like all these transformations, it requires considerable understanding of logical implications and consequences. This is especially true for the person (A in our example) who first states a matching rule. More importantly, that person must have (a) a means of making a convincing commitment (to match, in our example) and (b) the ability to wait until the partner takes his action in the original matrix. Finally, because both persons can play either role, there may be a problem of coordinating role assignments. The analysis is thwarted if both become committed to matching at the same time. Among these several problems the one of commitment seems the most central. The analysis states that the two come to the point at which B can say “I am proceeding with b , because I understand you are then required, by your prior commitment, to match it,” and A can only say (or think), ‘According to my commitment, which I am now unable to overturn, if you are doing b,, I must do a,.” AVERAGING OVER SUCCESSIVE OCCASIONS Most relationships involve repeated interaction about the same or similar things; that is, there are a number of separate occasions on which both persons enact items from their respective behavioral repertories. This makes it possible for the persons to think about the pattern of their individual and joint actions on a series of occasions. Perhaps the most common example is the mutual patterning of choices involved in turn taking. ‘“You have what you want this time, and the next time | will have what I want.” As this example suggests, sequential rules for choice often evolve in noncorrespondent relations to provide a mutually acceptable equalization of the two persons’ outcomes. Other rules serve the interests of the individual, as in protecting him from exploitation by his partner. In either case the effect of these rules, which we refer to as sequential transformations, is to transform the given matrix. (It will undoubtedly be clear to the reader that we are dealing here with a temporal pattern of events over successive instances of mutual action. This is to be contrasted with the preceding section in which we considered the implications of the temporal sequence of events during a single instance of mutual action.) The Consequences of Sequential Transformations Following a systematic sequence of choices in a given matrix is a means of limiting the outcomes to certain portions of the matrix or, in some cases, of spreading the outcomes systematically over the entire matrix. This is most readily illustrated when A always chooses a, and B alternates between U, and b,. Obviously the result will be an alternation of outcomes between those in the a,b, cell and those in the a,b, cell. Some of the many possibilities are shown in Figure 6.12 in which we present six simple rules (e.g., for B): (a) repeatedly play b,, (b) repeatedly play b», (c) play b,; and then alternate (i.e., alternate between b, and b,, beginning with b,), (d) play b,and then alternate, (e) randomly choose b, orb, each time (in ratio of 50:50), and (f) ‘’tit-for-tat,’’ which means “play what the partner played last time.” Figure 6.12 shows the consequences of the two persons’ adopting various pairs of these rules. The part of each small matrix drawn in heavy outline is sampled by the given pair of sequential rules. The outcomes gained by each member of the pair would yield an average equal to his average outcome in the indicated portion of the matrix. (The consequences of tit-for-tat are only approximately as shown because the person will have to make a first choice before being able to match what his partner did before and the partner will have a final “unanswered” choice. The consequences of mutual tit-for-tat are equivocal, depending on the initial choices the pair happens to make.) Although some of the rule combinations in Figure 6.12 focus on one cell, of greater interest here are those that average over two cells or all four cells. (More complex rules may average over three of the four cells, e.g., b,b,bob\b,b. . paired with Aafia pany. The specific consequences of any of these combinations of rules will depend, of course, on the distribution of outcomes in the given matrix. A convenient way to represent the possibilities is by a plot of the four pairs of A’s and B’s outcomes in the given matrix. This is shown in Figure 6.13 for the PDG, the threat game, and symmetric and asymmetric games from Figure 4.4. Each pair of outcomes in the given matrix is plotted as an x. It is a fact that the average of any combination of cells in a given matrix falls within the convex polygon formed by connecting its four pairs of values (the four x’s). This is shown for each of the four patterns by the crosshatched area. Thus any set of sequential rules must yield, as an average outcome, some point within that area. The consequences of seven of the pairs of rules, corresponding to the numbered pairs in Figure 6.12, are plotted in the areas of Figure 6.13. The particular rules we have chosen yield outcomes located midway between pairs of outcomes in the given matrix and at the center of gravity of the crosshatched area. Other ‘sayni [erjuanbas jo suotjeurquios snore Aq payduies x1yeur uaa8 ayy yosuoniog Z1°9 amn31q asay} JO auO yeI—10j—-311 (f) ee as tte wopuey | np. ts 3 J amuae | ajni s,Y UOs1ag %q/‘q wopuey (a) ajeusayyje ‘°q (p) ajeusayje ‘'g (2) &q yeaday (4) 'g yeaday (2) aynd $,q UOSIAdg Threat game ENN Figure 6.13 Consequences of different combinations of sequential rules for four different patterns. rules, representing various weightings of the combinations of cells, would yield outcome pairs in other parts of the area; for example, rules producinga,b,anday,b, ina ratio of 2:1 would yield the outcomes indicated by asterisks. (This results in equal outcomes for A and B in the asymmetric game.) These examples serve to make two points: (a) Sequential transformations can yield new sets of outcomes on the frontier of the relationship. (Cf. the discussion of frontier in Chapter 5.) Thus, in effect, they LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS make it possible to increase the degree of correspondence in the relationship. The particular sequence required to accomplish this depends, of course, on the given pattern; for example, pair 3 (or any pair sampling the upper row) yields new frontier points for PDG and the threat game, pair 6 (or any pair sampling the a,b, and a,b, cells) does so for the symmetric game, and pair 3 (or any pair sampling the upper row) does so for the asymmetric game. More generally, the consequence of most pairs of sequential rules depends greatly on the given matrix, as shown in Figure 6.13. (b) Sequential transformations do not add pairs of outcomes outside the limits of the set defined by the given pairs. The domain of pairs, indicated by the crosshatched polygon, is not changed in shape. It is changed by various outcome transformations, which fact, as discussed in Chapter 7, creates the basis for the joint use of sequential rules and outcome transformations. At present it is important to note that the various pairs of rules differ in the degree to which they satisfy various value criteria. Pair3 satisfies both the criteria of max joint and min diff in the threat game, and pair 6 has the same effect on the symmetric game. The special pair indicated by the asterisk satisfies min diff but not max joint for the asymmetric game. (See discussion in Chapter 4 of irreconcilability between MJP and equality of outcomes iti such patterns.) The Choice Among Sequential Transformations When a person adopts a particular sequential policy, he is, in effect, acting within an interdependence matrix in which the alternatives are different policies. An example is the 6 x 6 matrix that can be derived for any game by entering A’s and B’s respective average outcomes in the 36 cells of Figure 6.12. A transformed matrix of this sort obviously has some relation to the given matrix on which it is based, its components depending in a systematic way on the components of the given matrix. We shall not attempt to determine the relations between these two sets of components but instead merely point out some of the major consequences of adopting certain policies. The pattern of sampling the cells of the given matrix, described in Figure 6.12, reveals that in most cases the consequences of B’s following a given sequential rule depend to a great extent on the rule A adopts. Those that are least affected by what the partner does, ‘repeat b;’ or “repeat b,,”” simply sample one row or the other. These clearly do not benefit B unless he already has a considerable degree of RC in the given matrix. Tit-for-tat has the interesting property that it samples cells located symmetrically with respect to the major axis (upper left to lower right) of the given matrix, regardless of the rule the partner follows. This has the important consequence that in symmetrical games the difference between own and other’s average score is minimized. Thus a person solely concerned about the min diff criterion and interacting in a symmetrical pattern can fulfill this criterion merely by the tit-for-tat sequential rule. (This is not exactly true, for the reason, mentioned earlier, that in any finite interaction sequence the person must make an initial choice without following the rule—before his partner has established a “prior choice,” and then on any last play the partner makes a choice to which the tit-for-tat sequence has no opportunity to reply.) It seems clear that for most given matrices the consequences of a given alternation rule depend a great deal on what rule the partner adopts. Against a similar alternation rule it samples the major diagonal of the matrix. Against the opposite alternation rule or against tit-for-tat it samples the minor diagonal. (Against a tit-for-tat with a one-step lag—“do what the partner did time before last’’—the alternation rule would also sample the major diagonal.) Random choice of the two responses (in a 50:50 ratio) produces a sampling of the entire matrix against all the other variable sequential rules (i.e., except against repeat a, or repeat a,). Under these circumstances it yields the person his grand average GM, and the average difference between his and his partner’s score is (GM,— GM.,). Just why a person might wish to sample the whole matrix requires some explaining. Superficially, this policy seems contrary to the central theme of the interdependence analysis, which is that the person takes account of the controls involved and attempts through selective action to use them to his own benefit. However, in games of very high conflict of interest (the constant-sum game is the best example) there are certain instances in which the best way a person can protect his own interests is by random response. Three constant-sum games (zero-sum games) are illustrated in Figure 6.14. In all such games, because of the strict conflict of interest, there is no basis for agreement between the two persons. Each must assume that the other, in the pursuit of his own interest, will consistently work against one’s own interest. In Case I, characterized mainly by BRC, each will follow his RC, and the interaction, however often repeated, will result ina,b,;—A making one point and B losing one. (We might doubt that B would stay in the game unless for reasons not specified in the matrix he is required to.) Case II, characterized largely by RC and BC, also has a consistent outcome but for a slightly different reason. B’s RC leads him to enact b, and, anticipating this, the BC impinging on A leads him to enact a. Case III, characterized primarily by MBC, poses an entirely different problem. The preferred action of each depends on what the other does. LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS INN {NIX IX Figure 6.14 Three constant-sum games that require different means for protecting the individual's interests. Accordingly, of course, each would prefer to wait to see what the other will do before deciding. Precluding this possibility (assuming that the movement of events requires both to act and prevents either from “‘waiting’), a random sequential rule has an advantage. Turning over the decision to the toss of a coin prevents one’s partner from anticipating one’s choice in any way. This is true for each single trial, but also over a series of trials it prevents his detecting any explicit or implicit patterning in one’s successive choices. Furthermore, a particular random rule (referred to as amixed or randomized strategy, and not necessarily selecting the two choices in a 50:50 ratio) has the special consequence that no matter what sequential rule the partner follows it yields one the same average value. In other words, if we imagine placing this particular rule in the matrix derived from Figure 6.12, its outcome is the same regardless of the partner's sequential rule. A mixed strategy with this property is calculated, for example, for person A in the third matrix of Figure 6.14, by determining an allocation of choices between a, and a, such that A’s average outcome will be the same when B chooses b, as when he chooses by. The proportion p of the time for A (randomly) to select a, is determined by solving the following equation which is simply a mathematical translation of the preceding sentence: PY) +30 =p). Ce) ape ee) The numbers in the equation are A’s outcomes in the matrix. The value of p is 5/7; therefore a, is chosen on five-sevenths of the occasions and 4@y, on two-sevenths. A random sequence with these proportions will yield A an average outcome of +1/7 no matter what B does. A similar argument and calculation could be made for person B. His best mixed strategy is to choose b, four-sevenths of the time and b,, three-sevenths. This rule will yield him an average outcome of —1/7. It is the minimax theorem of game theory (Luce and Raiffa, 1957) that these two sequential rules are in equilibrium—that they represent the best each person can do in the face of the other’s conflicting efforts. B minimizes the maximum loss A can impose on him and A maximizes the minimum gain B can restrict him to. It may be appropriate to remind the reader that the randomized sequential strategy, calculated as described above, is appropriate only for patterns in which the dominant component is MBC, as in Case III in Figure 6.14. The interested reader is referred to Appendix 3 of Luce and Raiffa (1957) for a summary of the three cases and other related ones. The Modifiability of Sequential Transformations. It is difficult to believe that a person would adopt a sequential rule for some purpose, for example, to sample the minor diagonal in the symmetric game in Figure 6.13 and then stick with it even though he found that his partner’s sequential rule was yielding a sampling of the major diagonal. Ordinarily such policies are highly modifiable in the light of their early consequences. Clearly, the sequential rule has no intrinsic property that requires its persistent pursuit, once adopted, regardless of the results. (In this respect the alternatives in the 6 X 6 matrix probably differ from ordinary behavioral alternatives. The latter ordinarily acquire some irreversibility or commitment during their enactment.) In view of this modifiability of sequential rules it is reasonable to assume that they are adjusted in successive interactions and that these adjustments are made on the basis of the rule(s) the partner seems to be following. Similarly, once a person has LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS learned what the various consequences are and can assume that his partner has similar sophistication, these adjustments can be made in advance by a “vicarious trial and error” process. In this, the person reasons somewhat as follows: “If I follow rule 1, my partner will find it advantageous to follow rule 6. In that case I'll find it desirable to shift to 3 and he'll shift to 4 and that will be O.K. with me. So I might as well start out with 3 and he'll either start with 4 or shift to it when he sees what I’m doing.” Indeed, because of their modifiability, the adoption of sequential rules is essentially a matter of agreement between the two persons. This is obvious for rules that serve their common interest such as alternation which permits turn taking. However, it is even true, although ina slightly different sense, for the rules that protect each person’s interests in a constant-sum game. The adoption of simple or mixed strategies that are in equilibrium at least indicates that the two persons see the relationship in the same way. It also suggests a kind of convergent conversation of the type above. Sequential Transformations in the Service of Outcome Transformations We noted earlier that sequential transformations do not change the shape of the plot of points (Figure 6.13), but they do make it possible for the distortions produced by outcome transformations to yield different effective matrices than they would otherwise. This results from the fact that sequential rules yield new points within the domain of the given plot that better satisfy various criteria, such as min diff or max joint. Therefore it seems reasonable to assume that sequential transformations are often used with various outcome transformations. This is described in Chapter ia THE CONSEQUENCES OF REPEATED PLAY In most experimental research on interdependence matrices the subjects are required to make choices among their alternatives simultaneously and independently (without communication) and to do this repeatedly for a number of trials. Does this procedure affect the nature of the interdependence between the two persons? The answer has already been implied in the foregoing discussions, but because of the widespread use of this procedure it must be made explicit and given some emphasis. This is necessary to counteract the unfortunate tendency for investigators to analyze a game theoretically in terms of ‘‘one-shot play’’ and then to be surprised when repeated play does not conform empirically to their analysis. Our point is, of course, that the procedure of repeated play transforms the pattern of interdependence. As a result the choices facing a person in simple, single-trial play in a given matrix may be quite different from those he faces in the transformed matrix generated by repeated play. The course of interaction over repeated trials can be exceedingly complex. Even for a simple interdependence pattern (e.g., MFC), what the two persons manage to communicate, how they succeed in influencing each other, and how their motivations and intentions wax and wane can be very different from one pair to another. Therefore it is impossible to analyze in simple terms the exact transformational effects of repeated play. We can, however, illustrate some of the possible components of this transformational process and explain some of the ways in which the interdependence may be modified. One aspect of repeated play is that it makes possible a detection of the outcome transformation the partner is making and a corresponding adjustment in one’s own transformation. As shown in Chapter 7, the outcome transformation that a person should make (in terms of achieving high given outcomes) is contingent in part on the transformation the partner adopts. With one-shot play one can only make assumptions about the partner and act accordingly. With repeated play, one is faced with what is effectively a coordination problem of adapting one’s choice criterion to the one the partner seems to be following. Perhaps the most obvious aspect of repeated play is that it affords a person the opportunity to decide in advance on a specific policy for his successive choices. The effective interdependence matrix for him at that point is the one constituted by the various rules available to him, those available to his partner, and the consequences of various pairs of rules. Figure 6.12 is illustrative of this effective matrix. As we have noted, the outcome pattern in this ‘rule matrix’’ depends on the given matrix in which the repeated play occurs. When the given matrix is characterized by considerable interdependence (i.e., when the BRC component is relatively small), the matrix of sequential rules is characterized by considerable MBC. Thus in Figure 6.12 the consequences of the nonrepetitive rules depend to a great degree on the rule the partner adopts. (The repetitive rules are appropriate only when one or both persons have dominant RC. An exception among the nonrepetitive rules is randomization, but this is a defensive way to avoid the implications of the interdependence that is appropriate only for a subset of the constant-sum matrices.) In brief—and this general idea will be intuitively clear to the player—the sequence one must follow for good outcomes depends on the sequence one’s partner follows. This is true even for MFC in which your LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS outcomes are totally under your partner’s control. With repeated play your problem is not simply whether to use your FC to the partner’s benefit or detriment (as it is in one-shot play) but rather it is how to use your FC to induce your partner to use his FC to your benefit. For this conversion of FC to BC, it is necessary to make sure that the partner experiences only (or mainly) outcomes from the main diagonal of the MFC matrix (see Figure 6.8), that is, that he be rewarded only when he rewards you and not otherwise. How to do this obviously depends on what he does; for example, for the limited set of rules specified in Figure 6.12 only certain combinations yield the main diagonal. The point is that even though the given matrix is an MFC pattern the person’s problem is one of coordinating with the partner in a sequential pattern of choices. Effectively, the person is in an MBC situation. Another aspect of repeated play (and one related to the sequential effects above) is that it makes possible something akin to a transpositional transformation of the given matrix. In the course of repeated play a person often has some opportunity to indicate his intention to match or not match his partner’s choice. If he succeeds in doing so, a double transposition of the given matrix is made possible. Using MFC as one example, we can see in Figure 6.15 that, when person A makes a ,commitment to match, B has RC in the effective matrix. B ensures himself a reward by helping A because A automatically returns the favor. In repeated play, ifA can manage to make his choice each time after first seeing B’s, he will find it fairly easy to communicate his commitment. The same is true for repeated play in which the two persons alternate in making their separate choices (as is easily done with decomposed versions of the PDG). Person A shows his intention to match B simply by always choosing the action previously chosen by B. Problems develop only ifB is trying to communicate a similar intention, in which case they may become locked-in on an exchange of nonrewarding choicés. In repeated play involving simultaneous and independent choices (a common experimental procedure) the matching commitment is more difficult to convey because MFC MFC’ MFC” ae Sa match mS Not match b, if eS Se Seen xs “ANS we 6.15 aE transposition of MFC. on trial N person A can only match B’s choice on trial N — 1. Thus paired with B’s current response is an action that matches his prior response, a fact that he is likely to overlook. Thus the communication of commitment that is necessary to accomplish the double transposition involves a good deal of noise and ambiguity. In general, these illustrations suggest that repeated play tends to transform the given matrix. The transformation is not simple in form and many ambiguities are involved. A person will have difficulty in determining the policy his partner is following and in communicating his own policy. A major source of confusion will be in sorting out the portion of his partner’s behavior that reflects his policy and the portion that reflects his reactions to one’s own actions. We might expect more efficient achievement of understanding if one person is more strongly guided by a policy intention and the other is more reactive and open to influence. Some of the communication and attribution problems alluded to here are considered in Chapter 8. The effect of repeated play on game behavior has been impressively documented by Shure and Meeker (1968). Subjects playing repeated trials of the PDG yielded about 50% competitive choices, which is close to the typical rate of such behavior in experiments using this procedure. In contrast, subjects playing under the same conditions but believing they were paired up with a new partner on each trial (the series thus constituting a succession of one-shot games) yielded a competitive choice rate of more than 80%. As the authors note, the latter is more in conformity with the one-play logic of the game which is to take the dominant (RC-favored) choice. At the other extreme are results presented by Deutsch (1958) for a procedure involving reversibility of choices. The PD game used was one that yielded a competitive choice rate of about 65% under standard simultaneous choice conditions. The reversibility procedure permitted each person to make tentative choices which could then be changed until both persons, knowing both choices, were satisfied. Under standard “individualistic” motivational conditions this procedure yielded a competitive choice rate of only 23%. We may suggest that the reversibility procedure permitted a player to communicate his intention to match the partner which then produced the effective matrix of the doubly transposed PDG (Figure 6.11).

