FI Origin and Evocation of Transformations Functions of Transformations, 169 The Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations, The Learning of Prosocial Transformations, 174 Domain of Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations, 175 The Functional Value of Egoistic Transformations, 176 The Tension Between Prosocial and Egoistic Transformations, 178 The Functional Approach, 178 Evidence of Transformations, 181 Evocation of Transformations, 184 Information About Other’s Outcomes, 184 Salience of Destructive Aspects of Conflict, 187 Future of the Relationship, 189 Evaluation Apprehension, 190 The Partner’s Apparent Transformation, 193 Transformations Made by Social Models, 193 Type and Amount of Incentive, 196 Decomposition, 199 Dispositional Sources of Transformations, 200 The General Theory of Transformations: The Self-Regulation of Motivation, 202 bs tieale Sar APN ay Pr, yy wt hee frie gM he jut ta MS ae ir a) weet O78 o gach pie cr 3 + , ang ton NOUSIONEE Pad) ? ieitheiiee cig anoiisrinotentan ot i.e ae r W ie a | tb > ‘4 ay at _otesanerteieas yo bias risks Tie ek. eee 1T ln s' Lita. i iy nly yy Pi bert \ epee 5 til) ee Apes ay | pest y ns Saiily ' lent HY 64 eae oak imap E ‘te neha eto Ca here ays ble lyon ray ee F Lseg PED vai ito tien Aaa de Sty! iceade) err on r tety ve iyrerckag a a x) mi rik hi 'Dverws cat ie na Spey! y mA on a si f th eo a Ma pone Piney et wealth ateolt Wed yt yhald ) einen My ‘Vitis q nod pore ABSTRACT This chapter considers the factors that are broadly responsible for the occurrence of transformations. At the outset an analysis is made of the functional value of the transformations described in Chapter 6 as applied to the salient patterns of interdependence identified in Chapter 4. This analysis identifies the functional bases for learning to make, under certain conditions, particular transformations for particular patterns of the given matrix. A subsequent section briefly considers the conceptual problems associated with interpreting behavior as providing evidence of transformations. We then discuss the evidence bearing on situational factors that evoke or elicit various types of transformation. A brief review is made of evidence pertaining to the existence of individual differences in transformational tendencies. A final section points to the general theory of self-regulation of motivation that 1s implied by the present special theory of transformations in contexts of social interdependence. In Chapter 6 we have analyzed the ways in which certain simple transformations modify the given matrix and create different interdependence problems for the dyad. We described a range of possible effects of transformations—possibilities that depend on the transformation or combination of transformations that each person makes and on their given relationship. In the present chapter we move from possibilities to actualities. We first continue the theoretical analysis by examining the potential benefits the two persons may gain from making certain transformations. This analysis of the functions served by transformations provides the basis for speculations about how interdependent persons learn to make them. FUNCTIONS OF TRANSFORMATIONS Why would interdependent people not behave according to the outcomes in the given matrix but instead transform it in some manner by treating it as if it were some other matrix? In our approach to this question we consider the functional values various transformations have for the individual. The benefits a person can derive from making a given transformation provide a basis for that transformation to be learned as a value, enacted under appropriate conditions, and maintained without sermons or examples. Also, of course, the experience of these benefits may heighten the person’s imitativeness of others who manifest similar transformations and may lend credibility to moral lectures. The strategy of our analysis is to examine a diverse sample of patterns of interdependence and to consider the advantages there might be for a person or pair of persons to adopt a given transformation. On the assumption that our sample of patterns adequately represents the learning situations in which, in general (across different cultures, social strata, and family and personal circumstances), such values might be acquired, the results of the analysis suggest the transformations that generally exist in human social life. In a later section, we raise the possibility of identifying different patterns of experience in interdependent relationships that generate individual differences in favored transformations. It is possible to distinguish two major functions that transformations may serve for the individual. First, they may provide a basis for action where none exists in the given matrix. The transformed matrix may have RC’ or BC’ along with the partner’s RC’ where the given matrix has neither (neither RC nor BC with partner’s RC). (As in Chapter 6, RC’ refers to reflexive control in the transformed matrix and RC, to reflexive control in the given matrix.) Second, they may enable the person more certainly to attain better given outcomes than he would otherwise. By following his RC’ or BC’ the person may obtain better outcomes in the given matrix than he would have if he had acted merely according to the RC or BC terms in the given matrix. An example provided by MFC is shown in Figure 7.1. If each person makes a max joint transformation, he has RC’ (favoring his first behavior) where in the orginal matrix he had none. If both persons act according to a Given Effective Figure 7.1. MFC and its max joint transformation. their RC’ values, each is assured of getting his best given outcome (+1), whereas in the absence of transformation his outcome is uncertain and may be 0. In the manner illustrated by this example we examined the consequences of a variety of transformations, specifically max joint, max other, max rel, min diff, min other, transpositions in which self or other goes first, and sequential transformations. This was done for the 22 matrices identified in Chapter 4 as salient, representing diverse regions and landmarks within the domain of 2 x 2 matrices. (The reader is referred to p. 109 fora list of these matrices and for references to the figures in which they appear.) We focused this analysis on matrices in which RC is absent and/or in which mutual following of RC results in poor given outcomes for one or both persons. In each case we determined what the consequences were for the individual who made a particular transformation when his partner made the same transformation or a different one (or none). The Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations The analysis reveals first that it is mutually desirable for the pair of persons to make certain transformations under certain conditions of interdependence. With mutual fate control, as shown above, and with fate control and behavior control (one person subject to FC, the other to BC), if both persons make the max joint or max other transformation, each has RC’ or BC’ coupled with partner’s RC’. If followed by both, this yields them their best given outcomes. In Chicken these same two transformations provide RC’ when none is present in the given matrix, and in PDG they shift the reflexive control from the D to the C action. If the resulting RC’ values are followed, in the case of PDG both persons receive more than they would have by following RC and in the case of Chicken, they avoid the lowest outcomes in the matrix and receive the next to the highest. Because these transformations do not yield the best outcomes in these latter cases, perceiving their benefits might be somewhat more difficult than in the preceding cases. Thus for PDG a person might require some experience with the low outcomes generated by mutual adherence to RC before he could fully appreciate the gains to be had in, say, a max joint transformation. With regard to the transpositional transformations, the correspondent mutual behavior control pattern makes it mutually desirable that someone (either A or B) act first and the FC-BC pattern makes it mutually desirable that a particular one (the one exercising the BC) do the same. In both cases the effect of the proper first action is to provide the second person with RC’ which, if followed, will be to their mutual benefit. It is true for both patterns that in the absence of transposition each person’s outcomes are uncertain. Thus there is a basis in these patterns for persons to learn that if they have BC over their partner it is beneficial to take the initiative in the interaction. Of course, counterinstances are provided by noncorrespondent mutual behavior control, and the rule should be learned as being adaptive only in the case of correspondence. A transformation involving coordinated sequencing is found to be functional for the turn-taking game shown in the upper part of Figure 7.2. Without some transformation A and B both get nothing at a,b, by following their RC values. A sequential transformation in which they shift between a,b, and a,b, permits them to divide up 12 units in various proportions, depending on the ratio of a,b, to a,b, occurrences. When max joint and min diff transformations are also introduced, the pair of persons has a basis for agreeing to coordinate on4a,b, and a,b, insome way (to max joint) and, specifically, to coordinate with a strict alternation or turn-taking pattern (to min diff). Once the sequential transformation is made the problem is implicitly a bargaining one, and the further max joint plus min diff transformation provides the equivalent of a “prominent” solution (in Schelling’s sense, 1960) to that problem. This transformation ‘‘package,” of sequential shifting guided by max joint and min diff, is mutually beneficial for a number of patterns similar to the turn-taking game, including Battle of the Sexes and Hero (also shown in Figure 7.2). The common component in these cases is correspondent MBC but the turn-taking configuration stems from the discordant MFC and/or BRC components. Another setting in which the min diff transformation has functional value, though in a different way, is the threat game. This situation has been described by Thibaut and Faucheux (1965) as requiring an agreement between the allocator and the threatener in which the former agrees to be just if the latter is loyal. This, of course, amounts to the one making a min diff transformation and the other, a max joint transformation. As in the turn-taking game, fulfilling the min diff criterion requires a sequential shifting, though with the difference that only the allocator must shift, and there is no need for coordination to attain the sequential transformation. The basic similarity between the turn-taking and the threat games is shown by the transposition of the latter in Figure 7.3. By insisting that the allocator (A) always makes his choice first before he himself decides what to do, the threatener (B) can transpose the threat game into the turntaking game. It is to B’s advantage to make the transposition because it then creates the configuration in which there are mutual benefits to be derived from the sequential and max joint plus min diff transformations. The turn—taking game (MBC + MFC + BRC) ss Hero (MBC + BRC) Figure 7.2 Some patterns in which a sequential transformation and max joint plus min diff are mutually desirable. (i) a a -Not B —_—> Given matrix Effective matrix Figure 7.3 By transposition the threat game becomes the turn-taking game. The preceding analysis has focused on the positive benefits to be gained from making certain transformations of the given matrix. By implication this analysis reveals the function of transformations in avoiding costly conflict and the aggressive retaliatory sequences that follow from unfair exchanges. A more complex analysis would deal with the cost-avoidance functions more directly but would require more differentiated matrices, both in behavior alternatives and outcome levels, and more consistent distinctions between the rewards and costs of interaction. An analysis of this sort would highlight the anxiety-avoidance motives that often are involved in learning to make prosocial transformations. It may be important to note here that in our analysis the max other criterion is never found to have greater functional value than the max joint criterion. In other words, these patterns of social interdependence do not suggest that there is any unique basis for learning pure altruism as contrasted with a “general welfare’ outlook in which the ‘general welfare’ includes one’s own interests. The Learning of Prosocial Transformations From the preceding illustrations we see that for’ some patterns of interdependence there is mutual benefit from max joint and max other transformations, for other patterns there is mutual benefit from transpositional transformations, and for still other patterns, from a sequential max joint~min diff package of transformations. In each case the mutual interest provides a basis for possible discussion and agreement about making the particular transformations and subsequently for experiencing their benefits. These situations seem ideally suited to concept and value learning, for the discussion is likely to make explicit the conceptual aspects of the transformations and, by raising the specter of the poor consequences of action in the untransformed matrix, to instill a positive evaluation of the transformations. The foregoing scenario suggests that the learning of mutually desirable transformations occurs in explicit discussion. This would, of course, include the tutelage of a naive or imperceptive interactor by one more sophisticated or sensible. The question naturally arises whether a person who has insight into the mutual desirability of transformations can induce a partner to make them without explicit communication, wholly by actions within the relationship. It must be noted first that, ina number of matrices with a mutual interest in prosocial transformations, if one person acts according to such a transformation, the other is better off by acting according to his own given outcomes than by adopting a similar transformation. This important phenomenon is discussed when we consider the functionality of egoistic transformations. The problem is epitomized by the PDG in which the person who acts according to a max joint or max other criterion is exploited by the person who acts according to max own (no transformation) or max rel. It is also apparent that making the first move necessary for a sequential transformation need not clearly convey to the partner the desirability of entering into a turn-taking sequence. The outcomes he gains from having a first turn may encourage him to expect more without having to reciprocate. (One wonders here about the unlearning that may sometimes be necessary in relation to the belief that other persons will max other while oneself can continue to max own, a belief based on the child’s early experiences with benevolent parents.) The conclusion to be drawn from these considerations seems to be that prosocial transformations can probably not be taught (or, at least, not effectively) by pure interaction without the benefit of explicit communication. This seems true for max joint and max other in certain mixed motive games and for the sequential transformation in other mixedmotive (turn-taking) games. The single exception seems to be the “going first’ transposition in the highly correspondent MBC and FC-BC patterns. Here there is a common interest in the proper exercise of initiative and no possibility of exploiting its occurrence. That certain prosocial transformations cannot be taught effectively by interaction without communication does not, of course, preclude the possibility that such transformations can be learned by observation and modeling (Bandura, 1969). The example of dyads who obtain good given outcomes by taking into account their effect on each other may provide the observer with much the same basis for valuing such “taking into account’”” as does his own experience in dyads. Furthermore, once learned, a transformation may be evoked by the example of the partner’s behavior. The person well inculcated with the norm of reciprocity will find the partner’s beneficent first move to be a clear signal to initiate sequential turn taking. Domain of Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations As we have seen, the max joint and max other transformations are useful for games with prominent MFC components (MFC, PDG, Chicken); that is, for the “exchange” games. The sequential max joint-min diff package of transformations is useful for games with a prominent MBC component and discordant additional components (turn-taking, Battle of the Sexes, and Hero), which may be described as the ‘’bargaining” games. Transpositions are functional for simple coordination games, best exemplified by correspondent MBC. What has been implicit should now be made explicit, that the highly noncorrespondent patterns and the other correspondent ones (based on BRC + MFC) involve no mutual interest in prosocial transformations. In the perfectly correspondent combination of BRC and MFC and in the disjunctive and conjunctive cooperative games, without the conflict of interest and without a need for coordination (both persons have RC), there is nothing to be gained from transformations. The same is true of the maximizing difference game and Martyr. In the high conflict of interest patterns (noncorrespondent MBC, noncorrespondent BRC + MFC) and the several patterns of unilateral dependence there is no mutual interest in making any of these transformations and therefore, no basis for a negotiation of transformations. The settings, then, in which prosocial transformations may be learned are primarily the relationships characterized by interdependence and intermediate degrees of correspondence—the mixed motive relationships in which individual interests neither fully coincide nor are in complete conflict with each other. These patterns of interdependence are probably common in human social life. The Functional Value of Egoistic Transformations Under certain conditions a person finds it beneficial to make no transformation or an egoistic one. Depending on the pattern and the criterion the partner is following, the person may find that his own given outcomes are higher if he follows a max own criterion (no transformation) than if he adopts a prosocial criterion, and he may find similar profit in a max rel transformation or a preemptive transposition. In Chicken and the Battle of the Sexes, if person B is simply maximizing his own outcome and A makes a max rel transformation which he makes known to B, A will get a better given outcome than otherwise. The shift in relationship is shown in Figure 7.4 for Chicken. The max rel transformation gives A a clear basis for action (RC’), and knowing that, B will presumably follow his BC’. These same two patterns also permit one person to get his best given value, if circumstances permitting, he is able to make a preemptive transposition. Thus these patterns in which correspondent MBC is combined with discordant MFC may provide experience that will encourage the display of a tough and competitive stance in which outdoing the other is valued and there is a commitment to the means of doing so. In Chapter 10 we discuss a related fact—that the person may benefit from conveying a firm intention to follow the max rel criterion on a contingent basis, that is, unless the partner meets certain conditions. This occurs in connection with the use of threat in bargaining. By and large, the most effective threat action is one that gives the threatener the greatest advantage over the other person. In his experience in identifying such actions and communicating a contingent commitment to them the person may learn the wisdom of scanning bargaining problems in terms of the max rel criterion. Chicken A bz Figure 7.4 Change in pattern whenA alone adopts a max rel transformation in Chicken. Chicken and PDG have the property that if B makes a max joint or max other transformation and A merely follows max own he gets his best given outcome. (Battle of the Sexes has the same consequence if B makes a max other transformation. The same is true for the threatener in the threat game and for either person in the turn-taking game. In neither of the last two, however, is there any reason for the partner to make a max other transformation.) What is particularly significant in Chicken and PDG is that these patterns create (a) a mutual desirability for a prosocial max joint or max other transformation and (b) a unilateral advantage for the person whose partner makes such a transformation but who himself continues to use the egoistic max own criterion. There is, in these patterns, the opportunity to learn to discriminate what value transformation the partner is making and to act accordingly. If he is acting egoistically, there is mutual benefit in encouraging a bilateral max joint transformation, but if he is already acting according to the prosocial criterion there is personal benefit in focusing exclusively on own outcomes. The other side of the coin is that the person who makes the prosocial transformation in the face of the partner’s egoistic action suffers low outcomes in the given matrix. They are low in the absolute range of outcomes and, of course, low in relation to what might be attained by interaction with another person who also makes a prosocial transformation. Rather similar are the examples mentioned earlier (Chicken and Battle of the Sexes) in which a person benefits from max rel when the partner simply persists in max own. The latter receives a smaller outcome than he might find reasonable to expect from the relationship. The Tension Between Prosocial and Egoistic Transformations The foregoing analysis shows that interdependence relationships provide settings in which, by virtue of the rewards they yield the individual, both prosocial and egoistic transformations may be learned. In two respects the learning must involve discrimination: (a) learning to make a transformation appropriate to the given interdependence pattern and (b) learning to make a transformation appropriate to the partner’s current or potential transformation. The latter is of particular importance because, as we have seen, in certain situations there are losses to be sustained by being more prosocial (or less competitive) in one’s transformations than is one’s partner. At the same time potential gains may go unrealized by failure to perceive the partner’s readiness for a joint move to prosocial transformations. The counterposed aspects of the situation are complex. Both persons may gain by such a joint move, but one may gain even more if he can meet the partner’s prosocial transformation with an egoistic one. However, that may be only a short-run advantage if its effect is to discourage the partner from continuing the transformation, in which case the possibilities of mutual gain in a joint prosocial orientation may be delayed or even made impossible. Aware of these opposing considerations, the socially sophisticated individual will experience a tension between prosocial and egoistic transformations. As we describe in Chapter 8, in his attempt to resolve this tension wisely, he will be deeply concerned with the attributional problems of inferring the partner’s actual and potential transformations and the presentational problems of creating a proper image of his own actual and potential transformations. The Functional Approach The preceding analysis provides a scenario both for the collective experience of interdependent people and for the individual experience of each person. In the course of social history mankind will have developed beliefs about the value of various behavioral rules and choice criteria, beliefs that reflect the benefits of these rules and criteria in reducing, under certain conditions, intrapersonal uncertainty and interpersonal conflict. These beliefs will be reflected in the moral and practical teachings of each human group and society. In the course of his own life history, as he moves through a variety of interpersonal relationships, the individual will experience the same benefits of these rules and criteria. Because of their availability in the common beliefs, he need not discover them anew. If well formulated and communicated, the rules reflected in the shared beliefs will afford him convenient guides for working out conflictavoidant and outcome-optimizing agreements with his counterparts. Thus, being considerate of other persons’ needs and helping them attain their goals will often be found necessary in order to obtain the cooperation from them that the individual desires. Furthermore, the elders and authorities in his group will urge the beliefs on him, reward his adherence to them, and even, on occasion, insist that he follow them. The elders have a direct interest in his adoption of the beliefs, not only as they affect his interaction with them but also as they affect his interaction with his peers (as when the mother invokes turn taking between her children in order to reduce conflict that is costly to herself as well as to them). If the social teachings are appropriate for the types of interdependence relationship and the other persons that the individual encounters, he will find that the social beliefs are confirmed by his experience. The social principles his parents recommend will prove to be useful in practice. From their beneficial consequences and the social incentives provided for their adoption the individual is likely to internalize the rules and criteria, gaining some satisfaction or dissatisfaction from his adherence or nonadherence to them that is independent of their instrumental efficacy in any particular interaction. Our argument here is a functional one—that the patterns of interdependence make possible and, indeed, even require the learning of value transformations. Because of their good consequences for him, in terms of his basic given outcomes, the individual learns to deal with the given pattern of interdependence as if it were a different pattern. This learning is reflected in his tendencies to apply action criteria that take account of the partner’s outcomes and to follow certain rules of timing and sequencing in interaction. Our approach is “functional” in the sense stated by Ralph Turner in an unpublished manuscript: Ideas, concepts, and imagery develop, persist, and seem vitally real because in some fashion they help to facilitate action. Concepts arise because using them makes a difference to those who employ them. This is an application of the fairly commonplace functional approach employed by such students as Dewey . and Malinowsky Our conclusion from this functional analysis is to be contrasted with views that emphasize exclusively the prosocial or egoistic nature of man. In our examination of the interdependence conditions for the acquisition of social concepts and motives we find no basis for concluding that altruistic or cooperative orientations are learned to a greater degree than selfish and competitive ones. Ashley Montague asserts that . the reproductive process is a cooperative one, and, in addition, development as one of a litter or group of siblings represents another early experience in the development of co-operation; development within a family represents a still further experience in the learning and practice of co-operation (1951, p. 46). If our matrices can be taken as representing the patterns of interdependence within heterosexual relationships, between siblings, and within families, we are required to disagree with Montague. If these relationships include the dilemmas, conflicts, mixed interests, and types of control reflected in the matrices (and we believe they do), it seems more reasonable to conclude that they also provide experiences in the learning and practice of distrust, competitiveness, and exploitation. At their best the fruits of such learning are represented by an individual flexibly and appropriately capable of both cooperative and competitive behavior. Our analysis has focused on interdependence patterns as sites for acquiring socially relevant values and behavioral tendencies, including an ‘altruistic’ concern for the outcomes of others. The analysis assumes that initially the person has an interest only in his own outcomes. It is possible, as certain evolutionary theorists have argued (e.g., Hamilton, 1964; Trivers, 1974), that some of the prosocial transformational tendencies are innate and therefore present without the kind of learning we have envisioned. We are in no position at present to specify the links between these two approaches to the origins of prosocial behavior. A basic similarity may be noted, however. The Trivers argument begins with the ““mixed-motive” relation that exists between parent and offspring because they share some genes but not others. Whereas each organism has an interest, so to speak, in perpetuating all of its own genes (this being true from the viewpoint of natural selection processes), the partial overlap of genes creates a selection pressure for behavioral tendencies that are partly prosocial and partly egoistic. Thus there is a selection for some parental behavior that is altruistic toward the offspring (e.g., initiating nurturant behavior during its vulnerable early life) but also for some self-interested behavior (e.g., rejecting the offspring during weaning which serves to preserve the mother’s health so that she may pass on her genes to further progeny). The rough parallels to our analysis, which points to the mixed-motive relationship as the crucial learning site and implies the desirability of learning conditional behavior rules, will be apparent to the reader. It is not inconceivable that the parallels are closer. Thus the demands of interdependent social life that “select” for certain behavior tendencies in the course of the individual's life may also have selected genetically for humans with those tendencies or, at least, with the aptitude for readily learning them. EVIDENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS As noted briefly in Chapter 1, the necessity for developing a theory of the effective matrix and of the transformation processes that link it to the given matrix is created by evidence that people commonly act in ways that are inconsistent with their own immediate outcomes as specified in the externally defined payoff structure of their relationship. As one of his propositions about social motivation, McClintock (1972b) states that ’’. . the attractiveness of outcomes for one actor may be influenced not only by the outcomes he receives, but also the outcomes which he judges the other(s) will receive” (p. 444). As exemplary evidence for this proposition McClintock refers to consistent observations from the maximizing difference game that subjects choose the (counter-RC) alternative that, from the point of view of the given values, is irrational. They do so because they “. . . define the value of outcomes to themselves not in terms of the absolute number of points each receives, but in terms of how many points more or less than the other player they attain” (p. 444); that is, they use the max rel criterion. Given this definition of value, their choices in the game represent a rational strategy. McClintock’s description of what we call the transformation process is that”. . an individual actor establishes the final attractiveness of an outcome by considering and comparing both own and other’s outcomes” (p. 445). He. notes that four outcome orientations have been suggested by empirical studies: maximization of own gain, max joint, max rel, and max other. In his important paper McClintock observes that choice behavior in a situation of interdependence may reveal what the person intrinsically values, his social motivation, or may be ’’a strategic response designed to affect the other’s subsequent choices. . .”” McClintock proposes that a distinction be made between “choices that are means versus those that are ends,” that is, between strategies and goals. In drawing this distinction, he implicitly raises the question: when can behavior inconsistent with the given matrix be taken as evidence of a transformation? In considering this question, we must first make clear that the payoffs Officially specified, as by a salary schedule or the experimenter’s game rules, may not define the given matrix. It is obvious that two persons may attach different subjective values to the same objective outcomes, for example, because of different states of satiation and need, different general comparison levels, or different degrees of boredom or fatigue with the behaviors on which the rewards are contingent. The official schedule only partly defines the given matrix because it is also a function of various general psychological factors not related to the specific relationship. Thus differences in reactions to a given official schedule are not to be equated entirely with differences in transformations. Setting aside that problem and assuming that we know the given matrix (at least, locally), the problem that McClintock raises is that behavior may depart from what is indicated by the given matrix either for strategic reasons or because of the person’s social motivation. This is most clearly a problem if behavior is part of a continuing relationship in which there will be future interaction (the evidence bearing on this factor is presented in the next section). For example, a person who benefits from an initial allocation of rewards that favors him over his partner may be observed to modify the allocation toward a more equal one (as by a side payment to the partner). This action, however, may be profitable to the person in terms of his own interest, permitting him to establish and/or maintain good relations with his partner and thereby later to attain the goals involved in that relationship; it may also enable the person to gain a positive evaluation from some third person observing his actions and thereby promote a relationship with that person that will serve important purposes. The outcome-equalizing behavior is, according to this view, a strategy to promote own gains and not attributable to the intrinsic satisfactions derived from equal outcomes (i.e., to an internalized value corresponding to a min diff transformation). In this analysis McClintock points to an important problem, although we are not comfortable with the terms in which he casts it. We believe the domain of social motivation should be expanded to include rules of turn taking and preemption as well as of giving weight to the partner’s outcomes, that is, to include sequential and transpositional transformations as well as outcome transformations. This expansion ofthe domain would incorporate with it certain acts that McClintock would view as strategic; for example, when one person gives the other a first turn with the expectation of having the second turn. We grant that the first turn may be merely strategic, but it may also reflect the fact that turn taking is valued in and of itself, just as maximizing the joint welfare may be. Most important in our analysis of the functional value of transformations is the suggestion that the means-end distinction will generally be blurred. From the actor’s point of view and in terms of the dynamics of the choice situation there is usually no question whether a transformational rule is followed for strategic ends or because it is valued in and of itself. Both consequences are typically involved because the rules (as the central concept we prefer rule to goal or motive) define modes of behavior that are both effective and good. The strategy—goal dichotomy reflects the common dilemma of the partner when, uncertain about the future of the relationship, he wonders whether to attribute behavior to the situation (available means for satisfying personal interests) or to the person (stable motives). The partner’s question does not necessarily provide the most fruitful distinction for the scientist, although perhaps because he shares the observer perspective with the partner he is likely to adopt it. With regard to the operational problem of what constitutes evidence of a transformation we find more useful the question of the total given matrix within which behavior is to be interpreted. What is the real game—the bigger game, if any—that the person is playing? Is cooperative behavior in the PDG to be taken as reflecting a max joint transformation, elicited strictly by the local structure of the PDG? (If so, the actor is likely to say that it is the good and moral way to deal with the interdependence problem and that it is the effective way for him to realize a good return from the game. To repeat, the ends versus means aspect of the rule will not be important to him.) Is the behavior to be taken as part of a larger game in which positive appraisal from the experimenter is thought to be attainable by cooperation (the 2 x 2 is imbedded in a larger N-person game) or in which future good relations with the partner are thereby ensured (the experimental series of interactions is imbedded in a more extended time frame)? In the latter case if we know enough about the larger given matrix we may be able to identify prosocial (and also egoistic) transformational tendencies in the behavior; that is to say, simply because a person treats the local game as part of a larger one does not mean that he is necessarily pursuing only his self-interest (making no transformation) in the larger context. Rules of max joint, turn taking, and so on, are just as appropriate in a subject’s relations to the experimenter or in his extended relationship with the partner as they are within the local confines of the experimental game itself. In general, then, we suggest that the appropriate question is whether the person is acting (and possibly making a transformation) with respect to the outcomes in the locally defined matrix or whether he is acting (and possibly making a transformation) with respect to outcomes in a more extensive game, that is, a game involving relations with other partners and/or future interactions with the present partner. By the nature of social life this question is difficult to answer. It involves those whom the person believes to be the witnesses to his present behavior and what he suspects may be the lasting evidence of that behavior. So little social life occurs outside a larger social context (and, indeed, it may be none) that the experimenter’s attempts to establish a context-free game situation run counter to the subjects’ strong expectations and create puzzlement and incredulity. Perhaps our greatest interpretive error will be to assume that the narrow context usually encompassed by the investigator’s analysis constitutes the total context governing the experimental subject’s behavior. EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS In this section we consider the conditions under which transformations are evoked. These include the range of circumstances under which people are induced to behave in ways different from those indicated by the immediate given matrix. As indicated by the preceding discussion, it will not always be clear from the circumstances whether the divergent behavior reflects a transformation of that matrix or is oriented toward (and possibly involves a transformation of) the relationship as more extensively defined. Information About Other’s Outcomes The transformation process is set in motion by information about the total pattern of interdependence, including both own and other’s outcomes. As McClintock notes ’’. . . to the extent that an individual is unaware that he is in an interdependent relationship though he may be, he will assume an own gain orientation . . .”” (1972b, p. 451). Beyond simple awareness of the interdependence, the person must have some conception of the relation between his own and his partner’s outcomes. This conception may be based on direct evidence or on his expectations and beliefs about their respective outcomes for the given situation (see elapse 8 on perceiving the given matrix). A number of studies appear to demonstrate the arousal of a max rel transformation when each person has knowledge of his own and the other’s outcomes. This seems to be clearly shown in the MDG, in which the cooperative choice promises to maximize both own and joint outcomes, whereas the competitive choice promises to maximize the difference between own and other’s outcomes (max rel). Thus competitive choices are made at the expense of some loss of own absolute outcomes and reflect uniquely a motivation to gain an advantage over the other. Increasing the salience of the difference between the two persons’ scores also seems to evoke max rel more strongly. McClintock and McNeel (1966b) studied the effects in the MDG of displaying to each subject the cumulative scores of both self and other as compared with the cumulative scores for self only. The results are strong. Display of own and other’s cumulative scores markedly increases the competitive response of choosing the max rel alternative. Here we must raise the issue discussed in the preceding section. The effect of the cumulative score feedback may reflect a process of imbedding the given game matrix in a broader one involving outcomes from the experimenter. This would be the proper interpretation of McClintock and McNeel’s results (and would throw in question what transformation, if any, were being made) if it could be shown that the cumulative display constitutes an implicit message to the subjects that the experimenter is evaluating them in terms of who gets the higher score. In considering further the tendency to choose the max rel alternative, it is not clear whether the aim of this choice is to move ahead or simply to catch up or avoid falling behind. If it is primarily the latter, then the motive might be better described in relation to min diff. Messick and Thorngate (1967) have developed an ingenious method for attempting to answer this question. A two-choice game that permits the subjects to opt for a relative gain was again used, and outcomes of both self and other were displayed after each trial of the game. In this experiment, however, the outcomes displayed to each of the two players were derived from different payoff matrices. In this way it was possible in one treatment (approach difference) to convey to each player that although he could never receive less than the other for any joint choice he could occasionally do better than the other. A subject’s choice of the alternative affording this possibility is interpreted as reflecting a motivational orientation to surpass the other. In another treatment (avoid difference) each player perceived that although he could not surpass the other, one alternative gave him the possibility of falling behind. His avoidance of this move (i.e., his playing of the other move) then may be taken to reflect the strength of his motivation to stay even. The results show that the motivation to avoid falling behind is significantly greater than that of surpassing the other. Furthermore, the former increases over time and the latter remains constant at a relatively low level. Messick and Thorngate’s results can be interpreted in terms of the combined effects of a strong max rel and a weak min diff tendency. These augment each other in the avoidance of falling behind and work against each other in the approach to gaining an advantage. Alternatively, the results may imply that the max rel transformation is nonlinear, similar to the nonlinear effects associated with the comparison level (Chapter 6). One could pose the similar question: is there greater motivation to catch up if one finds himself behind or to stay ahead if one has the lead? In one approach to answering this question McClintock and McNeel (1966b) examined rates of making competitive (maximizing—difference) choices in the MDG when the display of the cumulative choices of both players showed the person to be behind the other one, ahead of him, or even. These proportions which reflected a competitive orientation were .40 for those behind, .44 for those ahead, and .12 for those who were even. American college-student subjects made .50 competitive responses when ahead and .35 when behind, whereas Belgian students made only .38 competitive responses when ahead and .45 when behind. The authors tentatively interpret these rates as indicating that the Americans were more strongly motivated to stay ahead than the Belgians, who were relatively more concerned about being behind. As the authors acknowledge, these data must be interpreted with caution. Factors responsible for being ahead or behind are confounded with the situation of being ahead or behind. It would seem preferable to make these comparisons for each person to assess the degree to which his rate of competitive choices changes as he moves from being ahead to being behind and vice versa. Even better would be to arrange experimentally for some subjects to be ahead and others to be behind. The latter approach has been taken by Marwell, Ratcliff, and Schmitt (1969). Marwell et al. conducted an experiment in two stages. In the first stage two-thirds of the dyads (inequity condition) played a matrix game that systematically and inevitably gave higher monetary outcomes to one of the players; the remaining third of the dyads (equity condition) played a form of the same game that gave equal outcomes to the two players. In the second stage all dyads played the same MDG and everyone kept his first-stage partner. Cumulative scores (including first-stage scores) of both parties were presented on video. The dependent variable was frequency of competitive play in the MDG during the second stage. In the inequity dyads those who found themselves behind were more likely than those ahead to take the action that gave them an advantage (i.e., enabling them to catch up). Those ahead did not, on the average, play less competitively than subjects in the equity condition. The former, however, were somewhat more tolerant of their partners’ competitive moves, which is suggestive of a weak min diff orientation. Using a similar method, Pepitone et al. (1970) obtained similar results in the PDG. American and Italian students made more competitive choices when they were arbitrarily caused to be behind than when they were caused to be ahead. Those ahead played somewhat less competitively (though not significantly so) than subjects in undifferentiated, control dyads. Transitional probability data, which might reflect tolerance of the disadvantaged person's attempts to catch up, are not available. These studies provide some evidence, though not so strong as we might wish, of min diff transformation that leads the disadvantaged partner to initiate competitive behavior which tends to be unreciprocated by the advantaged member. Max rel in general seems to be a much stronger tendency in these experimental game settings, and the circumstances may not be the most favorable ones for observing the effects of min diff. Salience of Destructive Aspects of Conflict Earlier we saw that prosocial transformations have functional value only for patterns of intermediate correspondence. They are superfluous for patterns of high correspondence and nonfuctional (even detrimental to individual interest) for patterns of high noncorrespondence. On the assumption that their use is learned with this discrimination, transformations should be evoked most dependably for the intermediate, mixed-motive patterns. For more noncorrespondent patterns in which the possibilities of destructive conflict are more salient they cannot be counted on and explicit social processes will be necessary. Typically, in gaming research no communication between the players is permitted either before play has begun or during the intervals between trials. When communication is not only permitted but encouraged, the subjects have the opportunity to negotiate plans that vicariously and imaginatively anticipate the consequences of alternative courses of action. From the argument above this negotiation should reflect the degree of conflict and be oriented toward ensuring the operation of prosocial transformations or rendering them unnecessary. Bonacich (1972) has conducted an experiment in which such discussions were encouraged. A series of five-person groups played an extended version of the PDG for five trials under monetary incentives. On the first trial all of the groups played exactly the same game. On succeeding trials, however, half the groups (“high dilemma”) were presented PDGs that increased sharply from trial to trial in outcome noncorrespondence, whereas in the remaining half (‘low dilemma”) the increase in noncorrespondence was slight. Thus the high dilemma groups experienced a sharp rise over time in the temptation to make the competitive (defecting, exploitative) move. How did the high dilemma groups react to this potentially disruptive temptation? As Bonacich predicted, their reaction was to invoke strong normative forces to discourage self-aggrandizing and competitive behavior. In the discussion preceding each trial the high dilemma groups adjured one another not to acquiesce to temptation, characterizing competitive behavior in evaluative terms such as “cheat,” ‘screw,” “greed,” and “fink.” The frequency of use of such terms by these high dilemma groups remained high throughout the five trials, whereas in the low dilemma groups their use declined dramatically. Moreover, the high dilemma groups did in fact succeed in mobilizing a strong resistance to temptation. After each trial subjects were given this problem: “Assume that everyone in the group has agreed to cooperate. What is the minimum additional amount you would have to be offered before you would agree to makea. . noncooperative choice? Assume that you cannot share this additional reward with the other members.”’ After the first trial a relatively constant percentage of low dilemma group members, never more than 30%, said that they would have to be offered $20 or more to break the agreement to cooperate. Among the high dilemma members, however, this percentage increased steadily until by the last trial 82% would have to be offered $20 or more to break the agreement. This experiment by Bonacich provides evidence that when planning and negotiation are possible the anticipation of the destructive consequences of conflict encourages the group to invoke moral norms that entail max joint transformations. Whether these transformations will be honored in the behavior of the group member depends on the degree of noncorrespondence of their outcomes: plainly the conflict of interest may become too intense to permit cooperative behavior. However, the process in the high dilemma groups may serve another purpose which is to imbed the PDG in a larger relationship (one that extends beyond the laboratory) in which correspondence is high enough that cooperative game behavior can be expected even in the absence of prosocial transformations. Thus labeling the competitive behavior in strongly negative terms may imply that a person had better not act in that manner if he values the positive regard of his associates outside the laboratory. In general, one way that social systems deal with local conflict is by imbedding it in larger patterns of interdependence in which there is greater overall correspondence of outcomes. An effect similar to that of Bonacich appears in the earlier research of Thibaut and Faucheux (1965) and its subsequent variations (Thibaut, 1968), conducted in the setting of an asymmetrical relationship that is basically the threat game. Here, too, the negotiation and supplementation of transformations occurred mainly when the conflict of interest was critically high. When one member of the dyad was strongly tempted to be exploitative and self-aggrandizing and the other, disruptively disloyal, to defect, contractual agreements enforcing cooperation were negotiated by most of the dyads. These contracts involved a trade off between the first person’s min diff and the second person’s max joint. It was in this condition also—of high conflict of interest—that the parties agreed to impose the severest penalties for any contract violations. This is a clear case of imbedding the conflict situation in an extended one of greater common interest. Future of the Relationship Does anticipation of future interaction with a partner evoke a value transformation? Marlowe, Gergen, and Doob (1966) report two studies which suggest that it does. In their first study subjects played the PDG against a predominantly cooperative partner. Half the subjects anticipated that they would subsequently meet with their partners to “’. . discuss why you behaved as you did;” half had no expectation of a later meeting. Those who anticipated future interaction played more cooperatively in the PDG than those not anticipating further interaction. This finding suggests a straightforward effect of anticipated interaction in eliciting a max joint transformation. Of course, it may also be interpreted in terms of imbedding. The postgame discussion session enlarges the matrix within which the game choices are made. The second study revealed a complexity. When personal characteristics of the opponent are revealed, this information may reverse the effects of anticipated interaction. When the partner is perceived to be humble and self-effacing, anticipated interaction works as it did in the first study to increase cooperation. When the partner is perceived to be egotistical and self-centered, however, one is less likely to cooperate with him when future interaction is anticipated than when it is not. Results similar to those in the second study of Marlowe et al. are reported by Gruder (1971) ina bargaining study. When the opponent was perceived to be fair and reasonable, subjects bargained more cooperatively with him (made more concessions) if future interaction was anticipated than if it was not, but when the opponent was perceived to be exploitative and self-aggrandizing anticipation of future interaction had the opposite effect; there was less cooperation when interaction was anticipated than when it was not. Hence from the last two studies it seems evident that anticipated interaction does not simply and generally elicit a max joint transformation. The transformation is contingent on perceived properties of the other person. Descriptively, the results of the two studies suggest that subjects take into account the properties of opponents whom they expect to meet and that this appraisal causes them to make the transformations in their experimental behavior that are appropriate to the larger relationship in which the game is imbedded. If they expect to meet another who is cooperative (humble, reasonable) this anticipation instigates a rehearsal of cooperative behavior entailing a max joint transformation. If they expect to meet another who is competitive (self-centered, exploitative), they begin to rehearse competitive behavior that entails a max rel transformation. In other words, they adapt to the transformation the partner is expected to make in the extended relationship just as subjects adapt to their partner’s apparent transformations during game play (cf. below). A different consequence of the extended game made possible by a future relationship is suggested by the Morgan and Sawyer (1967) experiment. Subjects were 10-to-12-year-old boys, all classmates. Pairs of friends and pairs of nonfriends bargained for monetary outcomes on a “bargaining board,’” which systematically favored one member of each pair. Generally, the pairs adhered to a norm of strict equality of outcomes (min diff). This was uniformly true for nonfriends, but it was true among friends only when the disadvantaged boy could inform his partner of his wish for equality. When information about the most desired settlement could not be transmitted, agreements between friends moved toward maximizing joint outcomes, with the advantaged boy gaining a larger share of the total outcome. A plausible interpretation is that friends (having a future of turn taking and exchange that works like a present side payment) are able to tolerate a momentary inequality, especially when it is created by an artificial advantage to one member that produces a larger joint outcome. The disadvantaged member is confident of being reimbursed later and the advantaged member feels no awkwardness about his future obligations; that is, about being forced to be nice later on. In brief, max joint can be given priority within the local game because the pair can assume that min diff will also, over subsequent interaction, be satisfied. Evaluation Apprehension Just as the context provided by anticipations of later encounters with the partner may evoke value transformations, so may that provided by the wider community, especially the community of peers, with whom relationships have both a future and a history and within which a “reputation” matters. When its presence is salient, physically or symbolically, and it communicates an evaluative message either explicitly or tacitly, dyadic members can be expected to respond with appropriate value transformations. Some of these effects are shown in an experiment by Brown (1968). Ina first phase male adolescents played the Deutsch and Krauss trucking game against a competitively programmed confederate. In the conditions relevant to the present discussion all subjects believed that they were being observed through a one-way mirror by a group of their classmates. At the conclusion of the first phase subjects received handwritten comments from the fictitious audience which described the subject as appearing either foolish (“weak,” ‘a sucker”) or not foolish (“fair,”” “played it straight’’). In the second phase all subjects had an opportunity to retaliate: they now controlled the gate to the shorter one-way road and could charge tolls for passage through the gate. The charging of tolls, however, was costly to the subject himself, and the higher the toll, the greater the cost to self. Finally, half the subjects were led to believe that their opponent knew their costs for toll charging and half believed their opponents to be innocent of this knowledge. The results show that when a person is made to look weak and foolish in full view of an audience of his peers he will retaliate strongly against the source of his humiliation. He will retaliate with heightened intensity when he believes his opponent is ignorant of his costs. If he knows that his opponent knows how badly the retaliation is hurting both of them, the zeal for it cools. When the audience reaction to him has been favorable (when he is viewed as fair), his retaliation is much reduced, although his opponent treated him just as badly as the humiliated subject. It is tempting to conclude that public humiliation evokes a min other transformation because retaliation is made in the face of high cost to self; but since retaliation is suppressed when the opponent is aware of this high cost it may be more likely that the transformation aroused is max rel. When the audience evaluation is favorable, competitive transformations appear to be inhibited and a max own transformation is maintained, tinged (perhaps) with max joint. Research by Madsen and his colleagues also suggests the effects of the peer culture on game behavior. Two examples of this research will suffice to illustrate the point. Madsen and Shapira (1970) studied groups of children of both sexes, 7 to 9 years old, from a rural Mexican village and from three urban Los Angeles samples: Mexican-American, AfroAmerican, and Anglo-American. Four children of the same sex and ethnic group were seated at the four corners of the Madsen Cooperation Board. A circle was located on the board near each child and a child wona prize each time a movable stylus crossed into his circle. Attached to the stylus were four strings each held by one of the children; therefore the stylus could be moved only if one or two of the children pulled his string while the others released theirs; any subset of the group could prevent the others from obtaining prizes. Hence only by coordinated action could prizes be won. The differences in the play of this game were dramatic. Groups from the three urban samples exhibited so much competitiveness that hardly any prizes were won. Groups from the rural village, however, showed a steadily increasing, systematic cooperation that yielded many prizes. Using the same Cooperation Board, Shapira and Madsen (1969) studied 6-to-10-year-old Israeli children of both sexes, some from three different kibbutzim and some from a middle-class urban community. With a procedure similar to that used in the American study, the results again were clear cut. As in the Los Angeles samples, the urban children had great difficulty in coordinating, but the kibbutz children, like the rural Mexican children, quickly developed a systematic scheme for coordinating their actions. They also showed a great concern about equality in winning the prizes (“Everyone should get the same’”’). It seems reasonable to interpret the results of these two studies as reflecting normative pressures from preexisting and enduring relationships in the peer group (and possibly beyond). In the closely knit collective life of the kibbutz and the rural village norms that protect the welfare of the total group and that strongly discourage self-aggrandizing or exploitative behavior are likely to develop. In the city life is much less likely to be lived in an all-encompassing and monolithic enclave, and partners in an experimental session are likely to belong to only partly overlapping groups. Moreover, the norms that do develop will reflect the (putative) requirements for surviving in a city—the strength to compete in a succession of disparate encounters. Hence it may be concluded that the extraexperimental context provided by urban life generally aroused a max rel transformation among the urban children. The rural and kibbutz children appear to be strongly under the control of a max joint transformation and also, particularly among the kibbutz children, a constraint toward min diff. Once again, however, the effects may reflect an imbedding of the experimental game in the larger game of life. The reputation one makes through game behavior, especially in the village, is likely to have implications for one’s outcomes in extragame domains of interdependence. A discussion of evaluation apprehension would be incomplete without raising th2 question of the effects of the subjects’ perceptions of the experimeriter’s expectations. The experimenter is an omnipresent audience to game behavior and he can be assumed to be evaluating that behavior in terms of certain explicit criteria. Little is known about subjects’ perceptions of these matters. Their interdependent relationship with the experimenter (whether his evaluation matters to them, whether he has any extragame power over them, what they sense to be his dependence on them) is particularly uncertain. Almost every dyadic experiment lends itself to interpretation in terms of the larger subject-experimenter context within which the intersubject relationship exists. This problem has been perceptively discussed by Alexander and Weil (1969). The Partner’s Apparent Transformation The theoretical analysis shows that the value of most transformations depends not only on the pattern of interdependence but also on the transformation the partner makes. Consistent with this is a great deal of experimental work on subjects’ reactions to different programmed partners. The general result for the PDG (Oskamp, 1971) is that subjects respond somewhat competitively to consistently cooperative partners and strongly competitively to consistently competitive ones. The former probably reflects the joint effects of (a) the benefits in the given PDG matrix to be gained from using a max own or max rel criterion when the partner is using one that is max joint and (b) a tendency among some subjects to reciprocate a max joint transformation. The response to the consistently competitive partner is ambiguous regarding what transformation, if any, is involved. In the absence of alternative responses even the person who is interested in cooperation (max joint) may find it unacceptable to continue to attempt to cooperate in the face of the partner’s persistent refusal to do so. The subject tends to be most cooperative when the programmed partner is cooperative but contingently so, depending on the subject’s own cooperativeness. Thus, as would be expected from the mutual benefits to be gained from a bilateral max joint transformation, many subjects will shift toward cooperative behavior if the partner (a) refuses to be exploited and (b) shows willingness to be cooperative too. One of the few studies in which transformations have been directly assessed during the course of interaction is that of Pruitt (1970). He found that subjects’ description of their objectives as “helping the other person make as much money as possible,’ a max other criterion, increased over trials with cooperative input from the other and decreased over trials with competitive input. We may infer that the partner’s behavior indicates his transformation (cf. Chapter 8) and, accordingly, that Pruitt’s data show the process of adjusting one’s own transformation to that of the partner. Transformations Made by Social Models Actors are influenced in their transformations not only by their partners but also by the transformations they observe social models to make. This is undoubtedly an important part of the process by which transformational tendencies are learned. The learning, as well as the subsequent evocation, is probably most effective when the model is in an interdependence situation similar to that subsequently facing the person himself. An illustration of the modeling process (and it is not clear whether it involves the learning of a transformation—as the investigators believe—or the evocation of one) is provided by an experiment by Aronfreed and Paskal, reported in Aronfreed (1968). These authors designed a “prototype’”’ sequence of three phases that produced sympathetic behavior in 7-to-8-year-old girls. The girls individually performed a task requiring the pushing of one of three levers mounted on a choice-box to make a classification of various stimulus objects (toy replicas of real objects) according to whether they were most appropriate for a house (left lever), a dog (middle lever), or a school (right lever). The middle lever was in fact almost always inappropriate because the stimulus objects included almost no dog-relevant items. Several experimental conditions were created, each consisting of three phases of activity. In the prototype condition designed to produce sympathetic behavior (and successful in doing so) the first phase was intended to link the child’s own direct experience of pain with observed cues of another person’s experience of the same distress. Child and experimenter sat opposite one another. Both wore earphones that were attached to the choice-box on the pretext of monitoring noise from within the box. The child was instructed that any noises that might occur would be louder in the experimenter’s earphones than in her own. During some of the intertrial intervals following the child’s classification decisions the child heard a highly aversive loud noise. The occurrence of this noise was unpredictable and not contingent on which lever was pushed. Just before the noise began the experimenter lowered her head in her hands as a distress cue (as though she could already hear the noise), continuing to show this cue until the noise heard by the child was terminated. In the second phase of the prototype condition the child continued to wear the earphones. The experimenter, now without earphones, sat beside the child and used a second choice-box to make her own classifications after the child had made hers. She told the child that she might be able to use her box to turn off the noise that the child might continue to hear. Each time the child had made her classification of a toy replica the experimenter poised her hand over her own choice-box as though pondering her decision. The two outside levers were clearly the correct ones for almost all the toys and on half the classification trials the experimenter did choose an outside lever. On the other half the child again began to hear the unpredictable noise. On these trials the experimenter quickly pushed the middle lever, turning off the noise in the child’s earphones and announcing that as her intention. Thus the experimenter’s middlelever response entails some small cost to her while relieving the child’s considerable pain, as in Phase II of Figure 7.5. The third phase of the prototype condition tested the child’s tendency to reproduce the sympathetic response. Another girl, a trained confederate, now wore earphones. The subject, earphones removed, was assigned the role of using the second choice-box to classify each toy, following its classification by the confederate. For half the trials, just before the subject made her choice, the confederate placed her head in her hands, terminating this distress cue if the true subject made the taskinappropriate sympathetic choice of the middle lever. Choice of the middle lever during this third phase was thus the dependent measure of altruistic behavior. The subject’s own middle-lever response entailed some small cost to her, while relieving the confederate’s considerable pain, as in Phase III of Figure 7.5. The use of the middle response thus reflects a tendency to given consideration to the other person’s outcomes, as in a max other transformation. Its use by the children experiencing the prototype series of events shows the influence of the model provided by Experimenter Middle Other Phase II response response ae ae Confederate Phase III Middle response Subject Other response Figure 7.5 | Twophases of the experimental procedure followed by Aronfreed and Paskal. the experimenter’s behavior in relation to the interdependence position in which the child later found itself. Type and Amount of Incentive In commenting on the research by Madsen and his associates, it was noted that different implicit meanings seemed to be attached to competition and cooperation at the two different kinds of site—urban and rural. Among the rural and kibbutz children there were likely to have been strong normative pressures that defined cooperation as the good and moral behavior and competition as bad and immoral. Among the urban children the predominantly aggressive behavior may have reflected a conception of social life in which the competitive response is the strong response necessary for survival and the max rel transformation is regarded as acceptable for a wide range of interpersonal situations. These two orientations correspond to the two dimensions or factors that differentiated sites in a transnational study of negotiation conducted in three laboratories in Europe and five in the United States (Kelley, Shure, et al., 1970). The same experimental procedure was followed at all eight sites. Pairs of subjects were fully instructed in the rules and procedures of a bargaining game in which it was possible for each member to insure himself modest outcomes by direct unilateral action, but to attain large outcomes a cooperative strategy entailing a lengthened time perspective was necessary. Half the pairs at each site played for points and half played for rather substantial amounts of money. After the rules and procedures were clearly understood the subjects indicated privately on a series of bipolar scales how they expected the typical player would behave in the game and how they themselves expected to behave. These pregame ratings were factor analyzed to identify the main dimensions of “connotative’’ meaning (Osgood, Suci, and Tannenbaum, 1957). Two clear factors emerged: evaluative (E) and dynamism (D). Further analysis of these factors showed that cooperation versus competition had different connotative meanings at the different sites, reflected in the factor that the cooperative-competitive scale was associated with at a particular site. When associated with the E-factor, cooperation meant good, moral, and honest, whereas competition meant bad, immoral, and dishonest. When associated with the D-factor, cooperation meant weak and passive, whereas competition meant strong and active. At all sites subjects cooperated more effectively under the money incentive than under points. They also cooperated more at sites characterized by dominance of the D-factor than at those dominated by the E-factor. Furthermore, it was observed that - money tends to make the situation one in which cooperationcompetition means Dynamism . rather than Evaluation. . This more subtle effect seems to be that the situation becomes a more instrumental or task-like one with money and more interpersonal or moral in its implications when the incentive is merely points (p. 434). The moral orientation of the E-factor causes the person to construe a competitive response as being motivated by bad and immoral designs and such responses should be punished with indignation and selfrighteousness. In the more instrumental orientation of the D-factor such responses mean that the other is making a strong and active attempt to deal with a difficult task and the counterresponse is likely to carry the same motivation. Similarly, under a point incentive the competitive response encodes the meaning that the other intends to beat you and perhaps even to humiliate you, whereas an opponent who makes a competitive response to gain money is more likely to be perceived to be under the control of a legitimate external pressure that carries no personal overtones. It seems plausible that the types of relationship for which money* facilitates cooperation by giving an instrumental character to interpersonal strategies are those in which cooperative behavior dependably improves outcomes. When the cooperative alternative is the risky or vulnerable one, instrumental considerations will dictate the adoption of other, for example, competitive lines of action. This suggests two related hypotheses concerning the kinds of relationship in which the type of incentive and its magnitude will affect tendencies to cooperate by evoking transformations. 1. Money evokes a max joint transformation for matrix patterns in which max joint is a viable transformation and money evokes a max rel transformation for patterns in which max rel is an advantageous transformation, given that the other person has made (or may be thought to make) a prosocial (e.g., a max joint) transformation. 2. The greater the magnitude of money, the stronger the arousal of the max joint transformation for all matrix patterns in which max joint is a viable transformation. From the data presently available it does not appear possible to evaluate these two hypotheses but there seems to be no disconfirming evi* More generally, by money we mean any item of value that can be accumulated and transported (without losing its value) outside the interactive situation—hence prizes of candy and the like would be included in this conception. Points per se, on the other hand, cannot be transported and have no value apart from what they symbolize in the situation. dence. The evidence for hypothesis 2 seems straightforward within the range of situations that are relevant to test it. McClintock and McNeel (1966a, 1966b, 1967) report a series of experiments with the MDG in which monetary incentives were varied from relatively trivial to substantial amounts. The MDG is a game that structurally provides sufficient outcome correspondence to make unnecessary a max joint transformation. However, max joint serves to reinforce max own as a means to good given outcomes. Furthermore, max rel yields no advantage (in terms of given outcomes); therefore, if money heightens the importance of the given outcomes, it should suppress the max rel tendency. The results clearly indicate that subjects make significantly more cooperative responses under high monetary incentives than under low ones. Furthermore, the difference in cooperative responding was mainly attributable (McClintock and McNeel, 1966a) to the high incidence of cooperation among high incentive subjects after both members had made a cooperative response on the preceding trial. This ‘‘state-conditioned propensity” to increase the incidence of cooperation after both had exhibited cooperation suggests the importance of being reassured that the partner is also responsive to the given outcomes and is not making a max rel transformation. Most of the research on incentives has varied money versus points (or imaginary money), hence is potentially relevant to hypothesis 1. The bulk of the research is concerned with the PDG. Although, as we have seen, joint outcomes are maximized by cooperative play, individual outcomes are not; the cooperative alternative is the joint solution but it entails a risk of exploitation. Therefore it would not be surprising if a monetary incentive did not consistently improve cooperation. The results are in fact uneven. Radlow, Weidner, and Hurst (1968) report heightened cooperation under a monetary incentive, whereas Gumpert, Deutsch, and Epstein (1969) report the opposite effect. Evans (1964) and Wrightsman (1966) report no differences, although their subjects played the game for only six and two trials respectively. Other bits of evidence appear to be consistent with the hypothesis. Although it represents a complex situation, the trucking game of Deutsch and Krauss (1965) would seem to be one in which a cooperative arrangement could be negotiated with reasonable dependability and Gallo (1966) has found a substantial monetary incentive to improve cooperation over the rates obtained with imaginary money. Finally an experiment by Daniels (1967) provides a reasonable test of both parts of hypothesis 1 —that money will arouse a max joint transformation for patterns in which max joint is viable but that it will arouse a max rel transformation when that is advantageous, given the other person might make a prosocial transformation. In a simple exchange relationship in which the cooperative alternative was a dependable way of increasing outcomes, subjects under a monetary incentive cooperated more than those under a point incentive. When, however, the nature of the exchange relationship was modified to permit the exploitation of cooperative overtures, the monetary incentive impaired cooperation. Decomposition The logic and method of decomposing the PDG (Pruitt, 1967, 1970) and other matrices were outlined in Chapter 2. There it was shown that there is an indefinitely large number of ways of specifying and presenting to subjects the BRC component (your gains) and the MFC component (other’s gains) in the PDG. A PDG matrix and three decomposed versions of it were presented in Figure 2.8. Is there any evidence that these different ways of presenting the same matrix elicit different value transformations? The answer, provided by Pruitt’s (1967) results, is a resounding “yes.” The rate of the C choice (the “cooperative” choice) was about 50% for the matrix version of the game, consistent with other studies of this matrix. In contrast, Game II began at 50% but declined over trials to 10 to 20%, Game III was consistently at the 70 to 90% level, and Game IV moved over trials from the 50% level to 70 to 80%. Clearly, the particular way in which the given relationship was analyzed for the subjects had a great effect on their behavior within it. Pruitt’s second study (1970) draws on questions about goals, strategy, and satisfaction with partner’s choices to determine what the basis for the different results might be. Game II, in which the choice is between (C) 6 points each for self and other and (D) 12 for self but —6 for other, was found to elicit an interest in the high (12 point) outcome along with, for some subjects, an interest in the fair division (via C). The latter min diff transformation is fragile and disappears when the partner chooses D. Game III, with a choice between (C) 12 points for the other and (D) 6 points for self, elicits the goal of achieving cooperation from the partner so that the large outcome (12) can be obtained. This interest persists in the face of some D choices by the partner. Game IV, witha choice between (C) 18 for other but —6 for self and (D) 6 for other, similarly creates an interest in the high outcome. This is initially offset by fear of the negative outcome but this fear disappears as the partner occasionally plays C. Overall, these results suggest that subjects respond selectively to the highest component outcome delineated by decomposition. It must be questioned, then, whether they recompose the game, that is, whether they add up the components and respond to the total interdependence pattern. In addition, the results may reflect a transformational tendency not yet considered in our scheme. This is a tendency to ‘go for” one’s own highest outcomes. This tendency can be described as a special nonlinear transformation of the max own criterion and might suggest that especially great weight is given to the highest outcomes in the matrix in setting one’s comparison level for that matrix. DISPOSITIONAL SOURCES OF TRANSFORMATIONS McClintock gives as one of his propositions about social motivation that “Individuals vary in terms of their likelihood to adopt one of the four motivational orientations across settings in which there is outcome interdependence” (1972b, p. 453). The different sorts of people we consider here are a selected set of those for whom some evidence exists about the kinds of transformation they are likely to make. We commence with sex differences. Terhune (1970) has reviewed the sex differences found in gaming and bargaining research and his major conclusions can be paraphrased as follows: when women are confronted with a conflict between their own interests and those of another, they search for an accommodative solution. If possible, they will seek to compromise and to avoid open competition. Their initial orientation is to cooperate and they will do so if from the beginning the other is cooperative, but if they are crossed they will respond to the exploitation with greater retaliation and apparent vindictiveness than will men. In contrast, when men encounter a partner who is highly cooperative from the beginning, they tend to exploit him. Men are more likely to adopt a tit-for-tat strategy and are more cooperative in response to such a strategy. These differing orientations have a familiar ring: they sound very much like the differences between the E-factor and D-factor orientations of Kelley, Shure, et al. (1970) reviewed in the preceding section (p. 196). Women appear to adopt a r:oral-evaluative (E-factor) orientation and men, an instrumental, task-oriented (D-factor) orientation. Before elaborating on this interpretation we need to make note of another variable that has been shown to be related to value transformation. In their research on Machiavellianism Christie and Geis (1970) have found that subjects differing in scores on the Mach scale show contrasting behaviors in a variety of bargaining and gaming situations. In one study triads composed of one subject scoring high on the Mach scale (high Mach), one in the middle range, and one low Mach played a modification of the coalition game of Vinacke and Arkoff (1957). High Machs outbargained low Machs and won more points. High Machs were even more successful when the ambiguity of the game was heightened (i.e., when the relative weights given each player were kept secret, as in a poker hand). High Machs appeared to depersonalize the situation, approaching it as a problem to be solved by cognitive-probabilistic strategies. Low Machs, on the other hand, invested the interaction with a strongly personal tone and responded in a more emotional and moralistic way. Under other conditions, however, the high Machs are more cooperative than the low Machs. Consider another experiment reported in the same book. The game was Chicken. On the first 10 trials all subjects played for points; on the next 10 trials half the subjects played for pennies and half for dollars (enabling them to win as much as 4 dollars per trial). All subjects played against a programmed other who always followed the same predominantly cooperative noncontingent strategy. On the first 10 trials the high and low Machs played about the same way—competitively on roughly 55% of the occasions. When money was introduced, the low Machs continued to play competitively, whereas the high Machs shifted significantly to a more cooperative strategy, particularly when they were playing for dollars. From the results of these two experiments it seems clear that the high Machs compete aggressively when it is to their immediate advantage (as in the K-sum coalition game), but they also cooperate when that appears to be advantageous (in Chicken with a monetary incentive). Low Machs appear to have little tactical or strategic orientation. In a further study, reported in the same book, there is evidence that low Machs do understand bargaining situations intellectually, but in games having emotional issues they become distracted by their ego-involvement (e.g., they lost most on issues they most strongly endorsed). High Machs remained detached from such issues and concentrated on winning. Again there is an apparent parallel between these orientations and those discussed earlier. The orientation of high Machs resembles that of male subjects and the orientation of low Machs resembles that of females (and women do score significantly lower than men on the Mach scales, according to Christie and Geis). Furthermore, these orientations appear to be similar to those induced by money versus points and by the D-factor versus the E-factor. Indeed, it is tempting to conclude that money versus points, men versus women, and high Mach versus low Mach all act in the same way to produce a D-factor or an E-factor orientation. This would have the further consequence that the former creates basically a max own transformation which then stimulates a max joint transformation when max joint improves own outcomes (as in patterns with relatively high outcome-correspondence) and a max rel transformation when (in less correspondent patterns) the other person can be induced to make a prosocial overture. However, the conditions that would be hypothesized to produce the E-factor orientation (points, women, low Mach) are heterogeneous in at least some of their effects. Points are not like femaleness and low Mach in creating an initial tendency toward cooperation, but points, women, and low Mach are alike in investing the relationship with a personal and moralistic meaning that leads to vindictive responding (a max rel or min other transformation) to the other’s competition. We have not speculated here about the possible origins of these differences in transformational dispositions, but we do note the approach to this problem thatis afforded by our theoretical analysis. The basicassumption is that transformational tendencies are acquired by experience in situations of social interdependence. This experience may be direct or vicarious (provided by social models) and is supplemented (and, perhaps to some degree, supplanted) by explicit teachings of social rules and behavior. The learning experience will depend on the patterns of interdependence within which one interacts and the transformational tendencies of the partners with whom one interacts. Thus we would seek to explain sex differences in transformation tendencies by reference to differences between male and female children in the distribution of interdependence patterns in which they have their social interaction (including the literal games they play) and in the transformational tendencies their partners most commonly manifest. It would be necessary, of course, to take account also of different normative teachings to which the sexes are exposed. Yet we would expect these teachings to be effective only within some limits set by the youngster’s experience in social interdependence. THE GENERAL THEORY OF TRANSFORMATIONS: THE SELF-REGULATION OF MOTIVATION The notion of transformational tendencies that are learned through interdependence experience is not original with us. McClintock observes that . because of this interdependence, which begins very early in life, the child learns to define, compare, and evaluate his behavioral alternatives not only in terms of their implications for achieving his own preferred ends, but also in terms of their implication for the outcomes that will be afforded others (1972b, p. 438). He refers to “‘the final attractiveness of an outcome” and two investigators influenced by McClintock refer to ‘the effective structure” a game has for subjects (Kuhlman and Marshello, 1975). Similar concepts and suggestions can be found in other writings in the literature on experimental games. As much as we owe our transformational viewpoint to McClintock’s research and writings, it differs from his “social motivation” approach in a number of respects. Perhaps most important is that our analysis points to a diversity of transformations not encompassed by the social motivation view. In addition to outcome transformations (which correspond to the “social motives’’), there are others that are transpositional and sequential. Our analysis gives the same status to, say, turn taking as to max joint. Once the notion of sequential transformations is introduced, the distinction between means and ends (McClintock’s goal versus strategy) becomes blurred. As we noted earlier, the benefit that A provides B as the first step in a turn-taking sequence might be viewed as a mere strategic move, done out of consideration of A’s long-term personal interests. Yet it can be done with a sense that “turn-taking is something good we ought to do” and with no more sense that “‘it’s the only way I'll ever get what I want” than using a max joint criterion in the PDG. In other words, turn taking is no different as a rule for social behavior than max joint. Both may (and, we would emphasize, do) involve mixtures of means and ends properties. More generally our view regarding prosocial transformation is that (a) all such transformations are of instrumental value in some situations; (b) all have social norms associated with them [the norm of reciprocity (Gouldner, 1960) associated with turn taking is a prime example]; (c) all provide a basis for conflict avoiding or conflict settling persuasive appeals and explicit agreements (cf. Chapter 10); and (d) by virtue of their functional value all are represented to some degree as internalized tendencies. They are learned as “rules” rather than as ‘‘goals.”” As rules, they have a high degree of contingent, situation-specific applicability. They are not (as implied by the terms goal or motive) stable sources of behavioral causality with high generalizability across situations. They do not cease to have functional value or strategic benefits for the actor simply because they become internalized. Consequently, they define modes of behavior that, subjectively, have both practical and moral worth. Our discussion of transformations does not begin to exhaust the list of behavioral tendencies that people learn in situations of interdependence. In our earlier work (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959) we summarized evidence that suggested that some people are overresponsive to the reward aspects of interpersonal relations and others, to the cost aspects. This can be described in terms of transformational tendencies that operate selectively with regard to different components of own outcomes, max own being differentiated into max rew versus min cost components. In the earlier book we speculated that these different tendencies derive from the person’s experience in social situations of uncertain outcomes and may reflect his competency and success. These tendencies would affect the values in the given matrix, hence might be distinguished from the transformations emphasized here. Like the present transformations, however, the reward versus cost orientation might also be evoked by the pattern of the given matrix; for example, when a person focuses more on his rewards when outcome correspondence is seen to be high but more on his costs when outcomes are noncorrespondent. Another transformation of own outcomes that may have high functional value for persons in certain relationships is the suppression of interest in own outcomes. If a person can learn to “do without,” to forgo many common rewards, he reduces his dependence on others. This can also be viewed as a means of placing a limitation on the power of other people. Viewed in this way, it constitutes the transformational route to what Homans describes as “the display of indifference’”’ (1974, p. 88) which makes a person appear powerful. As we have emphasized throughout this chapter, a rule that has practical effectiveness (e.g., as a power strategy) may also be internalized, in this case serving truly to increase the -person’s independence of socially mediated rewards. In terms of the component analysis described in earlier chapters the suppression of responsiveness to rewards might operate primarily with respect to the FC and BC to which the person is vulnerable, this being possible to the degree to which the kinds of rewards involved are different from those in the RC component. The phenomenon of commitment may also be conceptualized in transformational terms. It is central toa number of processes of concern in this book, often being essential to the transpositional process (preemption) described in Chapter 6 and playing an important role in the development of stable relations (Chapter 8). Commitment involves a promise never (or during some specified time period) to look at or consider certain alternatives (either certain behavioral alternatives, as im the preemptive strategy, or certain alternative partners, as in committing oneself to a particular relationship). The promise is psychologically viable if the person can manage to put these alternatives out of attention or consideration so that the rewards associated with them are no longer effective. The concept of commitment is closely related to that of decision. As noted in Chapter 11, Lewin conceptualized a decision in terms of an increase in the potency of one of the several overlapping situations corresponding to the various conflicting goals. The increase in potency of one of the situations can be considered a type of transformation. At the decision point the person makes up his mind and puts the rejected alternatives out of consideration. The functional value of this transformation derives from its promoting more effective action than would be possible if the person persisted in thinking about the total set of alternatives. The reader will recognize the affinity of these ideas to the concept of a postdecisional dissonance reduction process (Festinger, 1957) and to the notion of unequivocal behavioral orientation or UBO (Jones and Gerard, 1967). In general, we believe a fruitful line of theoretical work would be to consider such concepts as these from the point of view of the types of behavioral situation for which they have functional value. A taxonomy of such situations and a functional analysis of the various relevant motivational concepts (tension system, dissonance, decision, commitment, UBO, and reactance) might suggest a coherent framework within which apparently diverse phenomena can be located and synthesized. This would constitute a theoretical investigation of the processes and tendencies involved in relation to the impersonal environment, an investigation analogous to the present analysis of the rules and procedures involved in relating to other people. For more on this point see Chapter 11. Finally (although, again, we do not pretend to exhaust the domain of transformational phenomena), the ability to forego immediate rewards in favor of later ones—to delay gratification—is important in interdependent relationships. It is obviously essential to the process of turn taking during which the person must occasionally put off satisfying his own needs in order to permit the partner to satisfy his. Through its facilitation of the turn-taking sequence, the ability to delay gratification enables both persons to attain higher eventual outcomes in patterns of noncorrespondence (e.g., the turn-taking game) than they would if both maintained short time perspectives. In his summary of the evidence regarding the antecedents of delay of gratification Mischel (1974) includes social interdependence learning settings of the sort the present perspective would emphasize (e.g., relationships in which other persons have kept their promises of future rewards). In the present discussion Mischel’s writings are more important in providing the general theoretical context within which our analysis of transformations is located. He observes that ‘’the meaning and impact of a stimulus can be modified dramatically by cognitive transformations” (1973, p. 260). The transformations determine how long a child will be able to wait for a preferred but delayed outcome. Thus the child confronted with actual pretzel sticks or marshmallows can wait longer (in order to obtain more of them) if he “cognitively transforms the stimulus, for example, by thinking about the pretzel sticks as little brown logs or by thinking about the marshmallows as round white clouds or as cotton balls. . .’” (p. 260). In contrast, his ability to wait is less if he focuses cognitively on the consummatory properties of the objects (e.g., how they taste). From the present perspective these observations are highly suggestive of the kinds of perceptual and cognitive mechanism that make possible outcome transformations. At a more general level Mischel’s characterization of cognitive transformations has many parallels to our assumptions about the process. Cognitive transformations involve selective attention to and interpretation of certain aspects of the objective stimulus. In our examples the person focuses on certain aspects of the interdependence pattern and interprets his behavioral alternatives in a temporal or sequential framework. Cognitive transformations substantially alter the impact the stimulus exerts on behavior . .”” (p. 267). In our analysis transformations loosen the linkage between immediate stimuli and behavior by enabling the person to respond to a given interdependence matrix as if it were a different one. In this attenuating and modulating role cognitive transformations are part of the self-regulatory system. ‘The ‘essence of self-regulatory systems is the subject’s adoption of contingency rules that guide his behavior in the absence of, and sometimes in spite of, immediate external situational pressures” (p. 274). In his summary Mischel writes that . individual's self-regulatory systems include: the rules that specify goal or performance standards in particular situations; the consequences of achieving or failing to achieve those criteria; self-instructions and cognitive stimulus transformations to achieve the self control necessary for goal attainment; and organizing rules (plans) for the sequencing and termination of complex behavioral patterns in the absence of external supports and, indeed, in the face of external hindrances (p. 275). Itis unnecessary to note the specific parallels this list finds in our concepts of comparison level and the several varieties of transformation. Mischel’s statement makes clear what has been only implicit in our analysis, namely, the self-regulatory role of the transformations. They free the person from the control of the given matrix of immediate outcomes and enable him, at least in part, to control his motivation and thereby to regulate his behavior. This self-regulation permits action that takes account of a broader range of factors (the future, one’s partner, and so on) and is therefore more effective. Our assumption in this chapter has been that self-regulation is learned because of this very effectiveness.

