Processes of Attribution and SelfPresentation Showing and Inferring the Given Matrix, 213 The interpretation of Behavior, 214 Means-End Ambiguity of Choice, 215 Ambiguity of Valence, 216 The Interpretation of Behavior in Social Interaction, 217 Relative Contributions of the Interacting Members, 219 Presentation and Attribution of Value Transformations, 220 Self-Presentation in Interaction, 221 The Sequence and Timing of Choices, 224 Biases in the Attribution of Transformations, 226 Strategy or Social Motive? 228 Dynamic Sequences, 229 Development of the Relationship, 231 A Dilemma, 235 Escalation of Conflict, 237 nolisin 989 atiscs oc)! ‘ Payre ania cad Soe y matin taf vi hee 7 hy V =. a Sd ABSTRACT This chapter analyzes the processes by which the dyadic members learn the nature of the given matrix and the transformations that are being applied to it. In discussing these processes, account is taken of the cues presented by each member and the resulting attributions made about the nature of the relationship. In a concluding section the analysis is extended to show how self-presentational and attributional processes operate in the development of trust and intimacy and in the escalation of conflict. Interdependent persons have strong interests in explaining one another’s behavior. Each wants to know what the other person is really like in order to know what can be expected of him in the future and under what conditions his behavior will change. Predictability of the other person matters because most important social interaction occurs in relationships that extend into the future. Entering the relationship, committing oneself to it, implies using up scarce resources (time and energy investments that are irrecoverable), foregoing alternative relationships which then become unavailable, and so on. At other transition points (e.g., during periods of high conflict) the “terms” of the relationship may be questioned, and if the relationship is to continue a renewed commitment must be made. This commitment is made in the face of considerable uncertainty. The future issues, problems, and course of any temporally extended relationship cannot be entirely predictable. Therefore to make a decision to enter or continue the relationship the person must extract as much meaning as possible from the present behavior. This is equivalent to saying that he must attempt to understand (a) the pattern of the given matrix for the relationship and (b) the transformations that the other person is disposed to make. He must learn to make valid attributions about his partner and the relationship. Interdependent persons also have strong interests in their respective self-presentations. Each person finds it important to convey the reasons for his own behavior clearly to his partner. In terms of the present analysis, these reasons include both the person’s outcomes in the given matrix and the transformations he is willing to make in the particular relationship—his orientation to it; for example, expecting high rewards from the interaction, the person will wish to indicate to his partner that he values the early outcomes it yields. Similarly, valuing the relationship, he will wish to show his own commitment in order to reassure his partner and elicit a reciprocal commitment. With respect to transformations, the person will try to show that he is a considerate and fair person, again to reassure his prospective partner. In some instances, once sure of his partner’s commitment, the person may wish to establish his own superiority in providing rewards in order to set the stage for gaining advantages in the relationship (e.g., establishing high CL,), in bargaining). Given the strong interests of interdependent persons in both attribution and self-presentation and, further, given that each person is usually (from moment to moment) both a self-presenter and an attributer, it seems probable that the same rules are used for both aspects of the process. In other words, there is a “language” relating to action in interdependent relationshps that is defined by a set of rules used for encoding (self-presentation) and decoding (attribution). In this chapter we discuss some of these rules and, in particular, how the interdependence and interaction context of an action determines what its actor can hope to convey and what the partner is likely to make of it. Although there may be a common language of self-presentation and attribution, its use does not necessarily ensure agreement or common understanding. From Jones and Nisbett (1971) it seems clear that an actor and his observing partner may form quite different interpretations of the actor’s behavior even though both may be applying the same coding rules to the behavior. Information that is salient for the actor may not be salient for the partner. In interpreting his own behavior, the actor tends to focus his attention on features of the situation that elicited and constrained him to a particular subset of responses. The observer, on the other hand, tends to interpret the behavior as a manifestation of stable dispositions—personality traits—of the actor. Actors and observers are not only likely to find different kinds of information most salient but, indeed, when they never exchange roles (contrary to what we have assumed), they may apply quite different rules to the processes of encoding and decoding. Thus observers may make attributions that seriously misinterpret the meanings intended by the actor’s self-presentations. Judges in relation to criminals, children in relation to their parents, and the public in relation to movie stars, animals in the zoo, and other ‘‘inmates’’—in none of these instances does the observer have sufficent acquaintance with the actor’s role to ensure valid attributions about the significance intended by the actor’s selfATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION presentation. Similar confusions are made by persons from different cultures. Triandis, Vassiliou, and Nassiakou (1968) have investigated some of these misunderstandings as they might arise between Americans and Greeks. For one example a Greek who flatters, informs, or discusses matters with another perceives that he is giving status to the other. * That is the self-presentational meaning of his behavior. The receipt of this kind of behavior is not interpreted by the American as status enhancing. Thus, a Greek may expect appropriate behavior by the American in exchange for the extra status the Greek has conferred on him. If the American fails to perceive the Greek’s behavior as giving status, the Greek is likely to perceive him as ungrateful (p. 38). Although a common language requires the use of the same rules for the encoding and decoding communications about the relationship, a kind of communication may occur that entails no deliberate encoding or selfpresentation. Unselfconsciously expressive or involuntary behavior may provide cues (indicators, symptoms) that the actor never intended but can be accurately decoded by the other person. This kind of behavior includes paralanguage (voice qualities such as pitch and speech variations such as tempo and loudness), kinesics (body language), facial expressions, and eye contact. (For an integrative summary of research on these topics see Mehrabian, 1972.) These expressive, nonvoluntary communications may permit each participant to form reasonably good attributions about properties and situational reactions of the other. On the basis of this type of communication alone, however, the pair would not be likely to reach a common understanding, for neither member would know what he had expressed to the other nor even know definitely that he had expressed anything at all. Although there are various verbal and paralinguistic modes of communication about the relevant facts of interdependence, the ultimate * This may represent an ancient tradition among Greeks in interpreting presentations of the self, as exemplified in Plato’s second letter to Dionysius, Tyrant of Syracuse: “Now as in the beginning, you must show the way and I will follow your leading. If you show me marks of esteem, I will repay them; if I receive no such marks, I shall keep my own counsel. Note, too, that any marks of respect you show me, if you take the lead, will be evidence that you think highly of philosophy, and the very fact that you have examined other teachers of philosophy besides me will cause many to honor you as a true philosopher. On the other hand, any marks of respect that I show you, unless you return them, will be interpreted as evidence of my admiration of and desire for wealth—and such a name, we know, is nowhere an honest one. To put it in a nutshell, if you do homage to me, we both rise in men’s esteem; if I do homage to you, we both sink. So much for this subject.” (Hamilton and Cairns, 1969, p. 1565.) 22110) channel of such communication is behavior involved in the interdependence itself (be it verbal, gestural, or whatever). It is in what a person does and does not do and in the consequences of those actions (and actions foregone), both for the actor himself and for his partner, that the final and crucial evidence is provided about his rewards and costs, transformations, values, and intentions. Thus we have argued that the interest in attribution and _ self-presentation derives from interdependence that has certain properties (irreversibility, extensiveness, unpredictability). Here, we argue that the processes of attribution and self-presentation are, in the final analysis, based on interdependence, that is, on behavior and its consequences. In brief, interdependence provides both (a) the reasons for communication about person attributes and (b) the ultimate means of such communication. This chapter analyzes these processes. It also attempts to examine in the same terms the presentation of self and the attribution of other. It is assumed that the elements that are communicated are those pertaining to interdependence and that the rules for manipulating these elements in the service of self-presentation are the same as those rules used in processing these elements in making attributions. We discuss the processes by which the given matrix comes to be known by the participants and then turn to an analysis of how they learn about one another’s value transformations. This sequence of topics may seem to imply that a person first infers the partner’s given outcomes and then uses them as a basis for inferring the partner’s transformations. Although that may be an optimal sequence of events, the actual one may be quite different; for example, when assumptions about the partner’s transformations (those that might be based on the role definition of the partner, as ‘‘mother’’, “enemy”, or “lover’’) form the basis for inferring the partner’s given outcomes. Perhaps the most typical case is that in which the two kinds of knowledge about the given matrix and about the partner’s transformations are gained simultaneously. As noted in Chapter 1, the transformation process is the point in the causal chain for social behavior at which the “person” appears, both in fact and phenomenally, as a causal agent. The individual is aware that his partner’s behavior reflects not only the necessities of his situation, circumstances, biological need states, and abilities but also the more personal and voluntary factors such as attitudes, social values, and intentions. It is this subjective understanding of the transformational link in the causation of behavior that underlies the common attributional problem of accounting for the other’s behavior in terms of situational and uncontrollable factors versus personal and volitional factors. The same problem exists with respect to self-presentation (and associated selfATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION attribution, though we shall not consider this phenomenon). In the solution of these problems there is rarely the clear information about one class of causal factors, hence the relatively simple inferences possible about the other factors, that our discussion may imply. SHOWING AND INFERRING THE GIVEN MATRIX It should be clear at this point in the book that accurate knowledge of the pattern of outcomes in the given matrix is essential if the interdependent members are to realize the full potentiality of their relationship. How is this knowledge acquired?* A first reaction to the question is to assert that a frank and open discussion will lead to a correct joint appraisal. In brief, the discussion might go like this: each will describe to the other the various behaviors in his repertory and will indicate the hierarchy of his RC preferences; each will explain his FC preferences among the alternatives that the other’s repertory affords; and each will indicate his BC coordination preferences when outcome interferences and facilitations are experienced or anticipated. In addition, information will be exchanged about expectations and what else each person might be doing (their CL’s and GE Undoubtedly this process of open discussion will sometimes occur (ina more relaxed and informal way than we have summarized) and will sometimes lead to consensual understanding of the relationship. Still, by itself this cannot be the general solution. For this open and honest discussion to be appropriate outcomes in the relationship would have to be highly correspondent. (In noncorrespondent patterns untrustworthy, untrusting, deceptive, and evasive interactions would be more common.) If this correspondence were already known to the pair, there must be some basis other than open discussion for making this important attribution about the pattern of the given matrix. Furthermore, discussion—whether honest or deceptive—is not always possible because of the circumstances, common tasks, and necessity for action. Hence our analysis of the process through which the given matrix is jointly understood focuses on the production of behavior that is at least partly nonverbal and on attributions made of that behavior. It has to be confessed at the outset that little is known in detail about this process. * The given matrix may be imposed on the dyad by a third party (the experimenter or an industrial supervisor) who explains in detail the behavioral alternatives, the outcomes, and the patterning. We are not concerned here with external imposition. The Interpretation of Behavior The man in the street and the scientist share the same general approach to the interpretation of behavior. Both assume that B =f (P, E). Behavior isa function of the person and of the environment. Thus behavior is assumed to convey information about both P and E. Information about P (which is usually, as here, the particular concern) is derived by viewing the behavior in relation to the particular conditions under which it occurs (which include its foreseen consequences). Lewin’s The Conceptual Representation and the Measurement of Psychological Forces (1938) is an analysis of these interpretive rules as used in psychology. In what follows we assume that essentially the same rules are used, although perhaps less systematically, by common persons in their everyday affairs. An observer of a person’s behavior can make judgments about several different (though interrelated) aspects of its meaning: (a) the positive or negative quality of the consequences of that behavior, (b) the specific nature of the motivation that underlies it (the P factor because there is always some kind of P involvement), and (c) the main type of cause(s) involved in the behavior (the allocation between P and E, the stability of the causal factors, and so on). Aspect (a) has been the domain of preference scaling based on the analysis of choice behavior; (b) is the interpretive aspect emphasized by Jones and Davis (1965) in their theory of correspondent inferences. The P-cause (intention) takes its name from the consequences of the behavior. This identification of the motivation is least ambiguous when the behavior reflects a choice among alternatives and when the chosen action yields a single unique consequence (least noncommon effects). Aspect (c) has been the focus of attribution theory of the type developed by Kelley (1967), which considers the interpretive implications of the distribution of the behavior over actors, time, situations, stimuli, and so on. The information the observer has on which to base his interpretation of behavior depends on the number of alternatives or conditions pertaining to the behavior and their diversity. Just as the preference scaling will be limited to the set of alternatives the actor considers so also are the causal distinctions limited by the packages of consequences for the various choices (in the Jones and Davis paradigm) and by the different conditions over which the behavior is “distributed” (in the Kelley paradigm). Strictly speaking, causes can be inferred only with respect to the set of consequences examined and the set of factors over which the distribution is determined. The observer, however, may not limit himself to the explicit comparisons available to him. He may also make mental comparisons. Thus ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION he may locate the actor’s preferences among a limited set of alternatives on a broader scale by assuming that all the alternatives would be preferred to certain bad ones and that none would be preferred to certain good ones. He may even imagine the preference before it is expressed; for example, when he applies a simple causal schema (Kelley, 1972)—a social-cultural stereotype—that causally links types of actor to particular preferences. Similarly, he may take a given condition as being strongly determinative of the behavior (even though the proper comparison, involving the absence of that condition, has not been made) and make an external attribution for the behavior. In these ‘‘mental experiments” the person draws on his own experience as an actor and on his observations of other actors. Means-End Ambiguity of Choice Simple choice behavior of the actor is ambiguous in regard to locus of cause. To yield dependable interpretations it must be supplemented by a (real or imagined) comparison of conditions. Consider the choice behavior of a person who lives in a small town in which there are three similar movie theaters, all under the same management. On a particular evening the person is inspired to see a film. Although he makes a choice among the three possible actions (he goes to one of the theaters), he has no preferences among the actions per se but only about the films being shown. The films, however, bear no necessary relation to the actions themselves: the film he wanted most to see might have been shown at a different theater. The means-ends relations were established more or less arbitrarily by the manager of the theaters. In fact, the person’s choices might be best described as preferences about the manager’s behavior. There would be no essential change in the situation if the choice were replaced by a request to the manager for a particular film. Thus, when the relation between a person’s choice and his behavior can be shifted arbitrarily (e.g., by the action of some external agent—a theater manager), the choice reveals nothing about the actor’s evaluation of his behavior per se and the observer can draw no conclusions about causes for the behavior—that the behavior is in itself pleasing. The choice reflects something extrinsic to the behavior. Only when the relation between choice and behavior is relatively invariant does choice reflect causes intrinsic to the behavior. The example of choice among movie theaters is useful in illustrating some of the ways in which a person’s RC, FC, and BC can be distinguished by an observer. RC reflects the intrinsic consequences of a person’s own behavior—the consequences for him that it dependably yields without arbitrary external intervention. In the example presented the person has no RC: in their intrinsic qualities one action is like another. Evidence of RC would. require that the choice of theater be relatively constant and independent of type of film (which would be true if one of the theaters were discriminably closer to his home or had more comfortable seats). To pursue the original example the manager’s decisions create BC. The person’s preferred action will shift according to the ways in which the manager distributes the films among the three theaters. This process, however, really represents a conversion of managerial FC to BC: the more basic fact is that the manager controls attractive objects that he can offer or withhold from the person. Because these objects could potentially be separated from the manager’s control (he could be replaced), an observer is not likely to attribute the FC to intrinsic properties of the manager’s behavior. Other types of reward (praise, affection) would not be so separable. The separability of actions and consequences affords the means by which attributers distinguish different kinds of reward: objectrewards have a transportable value as a currency that is relatively independent of the identity of the donor, whereas the very meaning of affectional rewards is dependent on and closely associated with the identity of the donor. The example of the theaters also illustrates the problem of perceiving concordance-discordance in the given matrix, hence outcome correspondence. If it becomes profitable for the manager to place in his theaters just the type of film that the person most prefers, then his RC is concordantly related to the FC he exercises over the person and the given matrix has high outcome correspondence. The person is not likely to misperceive this harmony of interest, but again there may be ambiguity in identifying its causal locus. The person may attribute the concordance to his own good taste and economic power and those of his neighbors in the community or he may locate the cause in dispositional properties of the manager (as a value transformation). Ambiguity of Valence Simple choice behavior may also have some ambiguity regarding the positive or negative valence of the consequences. The chosen action may be more positive or less negative than the nonchosen one or both and the observer may find it difficult to make the discrimination. The distinction, however, can usually be made on the basis of response latencies. Response to the more positive alternative is made with greater alacrity (an approach response) than to the less negative alternative (an avoidance ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION component). Further cues are supplied by the conditions necessary to induce the choice behavior. As Lewin showed, conditions of external constraint—to prevent the chooser from “leaving the field’’—are necessary to induce a choice between two negative consequences. Emotional behavior also offers cues for inferring the reward-cost level of the choice alternatives—eager joyfulness accompanying the choice of the more positive alternative in contrast to the protesting and reluctant compliance in choosing the less negative alternative. The Interpretation of Behavior in Social Interaction The special problems of inference that arise in ongoing social interaction are now considered. So far, as in the extended example of the movie theaters, an experimenter (the manager) has intervened to structure the assessment of preferences in terms of controlled sets of choices confronting the person as actor. Without this intervention, as in everyday social interaction, the attributional problem for an observer (the partner) becomes more difficult. The comparison information that he would need in order to make dependable inferences is not routinely available. How does the observer, now as an interacting partner, obtain information about the elements of the given matrix—the actor’s RC, own FC over him, and the BC contingencies? The actor’s RC is again most likely to be manifested in choicelike behavior. In drawing inferences from these choice behaviors, however, the observer-partner must somehow manage to minimize his own possibly contaminating influence over them by withdrawing from close interdependence (a “time out’’) during the observational period. This lapsing of interdependence permits the actor to exhibit his preferences spontaneously and to free the consequences of his choice from interpretive confoundings. This source of confounding—between one person’s RC and the other’s FC as contributors to outcome consequences—is discussed below in regard to perceptions of relative control. In assessing his FC effects on the actor, the observer-partner will rely on expressive cues or, the relationship permitting, on choicelike requests about what the observer-partner should do. Even when the observer has no means of directly monitoring his effects on the actor, the observer has a basis for understanding his FC by applying a simple covariation rule (Kelley, 1971). This principle is illustrated in an experiment on MFC (Kelley, Thibaut, Radloff, and Mundy, 1962). In the experiment two subjects were placed before identical pieces of apparatus that provided each of them with two responses—a left button and a right button. On each successive presentation of a signal the subjects simultaneously pressed one of the buttons. After each response they received a gain or a loss. The response buttons of the two subjects were wired so that each of the responses controlled the other’s gains and losses. Thus each exercised total FC over the other. In the part of the experiment of present concern the interdependence was fully explained, except that subjects were not told which response had which effect on the other’s outcomes. Subjects occupied separate cubicles and no explicit communication was possible. The attributional problem facing the subjects is a difficult one: how to identify the response that helps the other so that an exchange of gains might be effected? The experimental results suggest that subjects are able to solve this problem: over the series of successive trials 26 of 34 pairs attained a stable sequence of exchanging gains. Approximately 40% of the subjects reported that they used a simple covariation rule to distinguish the effects of their responses: if one of their buttons was associated with trial-to-trial stability in their partner’s behavior, this meant that button-press yielded him gains, but if the button was associated with variability in the other’s behavior this meant that it gave him losses. (Note that one subject’s use of the covariation rule affords the other subject an opportunity to encode expressive behavior.) That applying and so interpreting the rule played an important part in solving the interdependence problem is indicated by the fact that it was reported in more of the pairs attaining a stable exchange of gains than in those failing to do so. The diagnosis of own FC effects on the other by use of the covariation rule requires the user to set aside his interest in gains and losses temporarily and to adopt an orientation aimed exclusively at acquiring information. Instead of responding to the other, he tentatively suspends the interdependence by deciding unilaterally to press one of his buttons repeatedly to gauge its effects on the temporal patterning of the other’s responses. (This strategy seems similar to that of the observer-partner who creates a lapse of interdependence in order to interpret the actor’s RC.) It is plain that both persons cannot adopt this strategy effectively at the same time: the programmed behavior of the attributor (who stabilizes his behavior to test its effects) will develop valid information only if the other responds “‘naturally’’ (attempts to maximize his gains). Simultaneous use of the attribution strategy—putting both on a selfprogrammed stability—would mislead both persons into believing that they are pressing the correct button. Making a clear attribution of RC and FC in the given matrix is probably easier than making one of BC, for it would appear to be simpler to attain the concept of main effects than that of conjunctivity or contingency. Again, though, as in identifying FC, the observer-partner tests for BC by ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION assessing the consequences of his own behavior for the other person. The attributor again takes the initiative, in this case by changing his behavior (or by making a move), and then waits for the other to follow by matching it. (This implies, of course, that there must be some means of monitoring the other’s behavior.) The attributor’s action thus constitutes a signal that invites coordination. Relative Contributions of the Interacting Members It will sometimes be difficult for the observer-partner to interpret the relative causal contributions made by himself and the other to consequences they jointly produce. Who has the control, the causal responsibility, and in what degree? In a series of experiments Horvitz and Kelley (unpublished) have investigated this question with respect to subjects’ assessments of own RC in relation to the other person’s FC over them. In these experiments the subjects believed that they were interdependent with another person in determining a numerical outcome. In fact, they were interdependent with a ‘‘person”’ simulated by the computer. Each person (real or simulated) had two alternative responses, each of which generated a fixed numerical value. On successive trials, as the two persons responded independently, the subject’s outcome was always the sum of the two values produced by himself and his partner. The difference between the values of the subject’s two responses (his RC) was varied and, independently, the partner’s control (his FC) was similarly varied. The question is the degree to which the subject forms an accurate assessment of how much his own choices (his RC) affect his total outcome score in relation to how much the partner’s choices (his FC) affect it. Over the series of experiments the results are consistent in showing that estimates of own control in relation to that of the partner are approximately accurate when own control is objectively equal to or greater than the partner’s. When own control is less than the partner’s, however, own control is overestimated. It is not clear just why this overestimation occurred nor (the related puzzlement) to what classes of situation its occurrence can be generalized. There is a hint in the data that suggests a tentative interpretation of the effect. The data show that absolute judgments of own control vary directly with FC when RC is very small. This can be taken to mean that, with small RC, the variation produced by the partner is often mistakenly attributed to oneself. More generally, one may notice some particular chance-produced subset of events that leads one to experience a sense of control and then evaluate the degree of control according to the magnitude of variation in the outcome. Another kind of error in estimation concerns judgments of CL,),. Evidence of this bias comes from experimental studies of bargaining in which each of the two bargainers knows the level of outcome he mustattain if he is to realize any profit. Neither knows the value specified for the other. This assigned value (the break-off value or CL,),) constitutes the main external cause for each bargainer’s behavior—how resistive or accommodative he will be. In two experiments, when subjects were asked at the end of the bargaining session to estimate their opponent’s value (his CL,,,), they consistently underestimated it (Pruitt and Drews, 1969; Kelley, Shure, et al., 1970). Similar results were obtained by Shure and Meeker (1969) for a game involving the division of a set of territories. The conclusion to be drawn from these three studies is that the causal contribution of an externally imposed factor (the opponent's CL,),) as a source of experienced conflict is systematically underestimated. From these studies alone it is not possible to assert that the opponent’s personal contribution to the conflict (by his intractable behavior) is overestimated, although this may appear to be a plausible inference. The attribution of such dispositional properties to the other person as proximal cause for his behavior is the topic of the next section on the perception of value transformations. PRESENTATION AND ATTRIBUTION OF VALUE TRANSFORMATIONS Often an observer-partner can assume that the actor in a social relationship has knowledge of the pattern of outcomes in the given matrix—of his own preferences, of his partner’s preferences, and the degree of correspondence between the two sets of preferences. When, in addition, the observer-partner has similar knowledge (it need not be the same, but he must assume it to be), he is able to discern how the actor’s choices relate to the given matrix. As we noted in the preceding section, the distinctions the observerpartner can make are limited by the set of choices available to the actor. As McClintock and Messick (McClintock, 1972a; Messick and McClintock, 1968) have shown, there are enough different plausible social motives that a choice between two simple alternatives, each with consequences for both self and partner, is likely to be ambiguous in its interpretations. These authors have worked out the logic of distinguishing among three of the motives that we have discussed as representing important outcome transformations by means of choices among alternatives (Figure 8.1). They point out that by increasing the number of alternatives (as in the third set of choices in the figure) evidence can be provided separately for ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION Person A D D Figure 8.1 Some sets of alternative actions for person B differing in their attributional implications. each of the three social motives (which are always confounded in such two-alternative choices as those to the left): maximizing own (illustrated by the C choice), maximizing the relative gain (illustrated by D), and maximizing joint gain (illustrated by E). McClintock and his colleagues have developed these choices as means of assessing subjects’ orientations to experimental games. These investigators themselves, the attributers in this case, use the chosen options and their consequences to infer the typical reasons behind a subject’s behavior. For our purpose the assessment rules McClintock and his group have developed are important in that they suggest the rules that people in general use in showing and inferring their orientations in various social relationships. Although it remains to be shown, there is little doubt that the man in the street uses much the same information and interpretive principles here as the psychologists do. Self-Presentation in Interaction Messick and McClintock demonstrate that, with the proper comparisons, experimenters can decode social motives (outcome transformations). We now turn to evidence of whether and how outcome transformations can be presented by partners in social interaction. Subjects can report their conscious motives for making particular choices in interaction with others. McClintock (1972a) asked subjects to set down verbal reports of their reasons for their choices during the course of playing the MDG. The following categories summarize the principal reasons given for their choices: To try to get as many points as possible for myself. To keep the lead. To catch up with the other player. To help the other player get more points. To get as many points as possible for both of us. To get the other player to play differently. To try something new. To learn something about the game or the other player. For no precise reason. For another reason (explanation given). Se ee Oe a pet In a later study based on this list McClintock asked subjects in Belgium and the United States to indicate on each of 100 trials which cell in the MDG matrix they preferred and for which of the 10 reasons. Across the Belgian and American samples 85% of the reasons given for preferring a cell fell in the first five categories—those most indicative of the major outcome transformations as defined here. Although it is plain that interactors can report their motives for choices (at least in the MDG), some patterns in the given matrix may be better vehicles than others for the expression or presentation of personal dispositions. In a questionnaire study (Kelley, Jaffe, and Oliver, unpublished) subjects were asked to show how they would express various traits in moves they would make ina set of matrix patterns. The four traits they were asked to exemplify were fair-just, considerate-altruistic, achieving-competitive, and brave-courageous. The patterns in which they were asked to demonstrate each of the traits were perfectly correspondent MBC, PDG, Chicken, and perfectly noncorrespondent MBC. Subjects found correspondent MBC to be the least useful of the four patterns for expressive purposes: it provides fewer ways than the others of distinctively presenting the traits. For example, the consideratealtruistic trait is generally expressed by taking negative outcomes while giving the partner a positive one. This is not possible in the correspondent pattern, and the encoding of this trait gets maximally confused with the others. In the three other patterns the considerate-altruistic trait is one of those most clearly differentiated from the rest. Similarly, the achievingcompetitive trait (expressed by taking a positive outcome while giving the partner a negative one) is well differentiated from the other traits in all of the patterns except correspondent MBC. Achieving-competitive is most differentiated from its closest neighbor (brave-courageous) in the nonATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION correspondent MBC pattern, apparently because of a clear separation between the choice that yields self a negative outcome (for bravery) and the choice that yields self an advantage (for competitiveness). At least for 2 x 2 matrices, most patterns are probably constraining with respect to (a) the single dispositions that are difficult to encode and (b) the particular pairs of dispositions that are easily confused. One criterion for “optimality’”’ of pattern would be the degree to which the pattern permits the clear expression of traits; for example, the optimal form of Chicken would presumably permit the clearest display of courage (see Chapter 5 and next section). PDG is a relatively poor vehicle for self-expression, considering the ambiguity of its moves (a point that we discuss further). Still, although its language is ambiguous, it is superior to correspondent MBC which provides hardly any language at all. The research of Kelley and his colleagues shows that patterns differ in the ease and precision with which they may be employed to reveal dispositions. It is also possible, although Kelley’s research cannot help with this question, that some dispositions are more difficult to encode than others—that there is less of a language available to express them or to express them in a way that distinguishes them clearly from other dispositions. In any case, once motivational dispositions are encoded it is important to know whether there are differences among them in the ease with which they can be decoded. This is one of the questions addressed by the research of Thorngate (undated). In his experiment Thorngate asked subjects to predict the choices of a target person (the ‘‘chooser’’) who was programmed to make Pruittdecomposed choices expressing one of seven different orientations. The orientations of choosers remained constant throughout the experiment and ranged from one that was highly competitive (reflecting a goal of maximizing relative gain) to one that was consistently altruistic (reflecting a goal of maximizing other’s gain). On each trial subjects were shown the decomposed choice-alternatives. During the first 10 trials, however, they received no feedback about the chooser’s actual choices; hence predictions during these trials were merely guesses that can be taken to reveal expectations about the most likely or most plausible behavior of a chooser. These results show that subjects make fewest errors predicting the choice behavior of the perfectly individualistic orientation (goal: to maximize own gain). A priori, then, subjects found the individualistic orientation most plausible. Other orientations, as they diverged in either direction (toward competition or toward altruism), were progressively less easily inferred. During the last 30 trials subjects were given feedback after each trial about the correctness of their predictions of the choices made by the chooser. The subjects generally showed improvement in their ability to predict the chooser’s behavior. There were striking differences, however, depending on the chooser’s orientation, in the level of accuracy attained. When the orientation of the chooser was any of those ranging from individualistic to competitive—when the chooser weighted his own interest above that of the other—subjects learned to predict the behavior almost perfectly; but, when the chooser’s orientation was any of those ranging from cooperative to altruistic—when he weighted the other’s interest at least as heavily as his own—subjects were significantly less able to make accurate predictions. In commenting on the implications of his research, Thorngate observes that his subjects were adept at learning to discern the motivational orientation underlying the chooser’s behavior and that this high level of accuracy leaves unanswered the question why, in real life, certain decision-maker motives seem to be widely misperceived. As one possible answer he speculated that misinformation about the given situation may be responsible for these errors. Political leaders, for example, may purposely withhold information about the personal outcomes accruing from their decisions and/or emphasize only the benefits which accrue to others in hopes of demonstrating that these decisions resulted in maximizing the other’s gain and hence that they are truly beneficent. This underlines our point, made earlier, that valid inferences about value transformations are promoted by a more or less accurate understanding of the given matrix. Otherwise it is difficult to decide whether a given behavior represents a response to the given matrix or is causally grounded in personal dispositions. The Sequence and Timing of Choices As shown in Chapter 6, certain social values can be satisfied only by particular sequential patterns of choice. This is especially true for certain patterns of interdependence, namely those having an important component of MBC; for example, in the turn-taking game (Figure 4.8) turn taking by the pair will maximize the joint outcomes and minimize the difference between the individuals’ respective outcomes. One person’s alternating pattern of choices would afford a basis for inferring that he holds the social values corresponding to these two criteria. Here, as in general, the inference depends on the distribution of consequences. In certain cases, for example, those requiring 4:1 alternation for equal outcomes, an alternating pattern might indicate only a weak interest in equitable sharing of outcomes. ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION Going first in a preemption game and thereby changing the partner’s choice alternatives can also form the basis for inferences about value transformations. The game of Chicken (discussed on p. 134) is particularly interesting in the present connection because the testing of the observer-partner is an explicit and necessary part of the actor’s selfpresentational strategy. We can assume that to provide a setting for the display of courage the game must involve one option that is safe and another that is risky. This is shown for the actor A in Figure 8.2 in which his choice of C yields a medium outcome no matter what B (the observerpartner) does, but the D choice yields a high or low outcome, depending on whatB does. By making the D choice A puts his fate in B’s hands; thus the choice of D is evidence of willingness to take a risk. The D choice, however, can indicate this willingness only if there is no other basis for its choice. This requires that the high and low outcomes be equally likely; therefore there can be no expectation of a higher or lower outcome on the average for the D choice than for the C choice. The latter requires that, when A chooses D and confronts B with that choice, A must be maximally uncertain about what B will then do. The preemptive choice of D is evidence of stupidity if the other person is certain to reciprocate with D and evidence of an inane exhibitionism if he is sure to reciprocate with C. To present self as willing to face risky uncertainty the preemptive choice must put the partner in a situation in which his choice is a close one. In other words, A’s presentation of his courage requires the creation of a special set of causal conditions for the partner’s subsequent behavior, conditions that place that partner in maximum conflict. Actor A E Observer— partner B D Figure 8.2. The game of Chicken. Attributions of value transformations may also depend on the context provided by the other person’s concurrent behavior. Kelley and Stahelski (1970a) show that an actor’s intentions (the goal he has set for himself) in the PDG is inferred not only on the basis of his own successive actions but on the actions of his partner in the meantime. Thus an actor who shifts from C to D on successive occasions is judged more competitive if his partner’s first response is cooperative than if itis competitive. In the MDG the partner’s move makes little difference in the interpretation of the C to D shift, and (consistent with the McClintock and Messick analysis) the rate of a competitive attribution for this shift is rather high (Kelley, unpublished data). However, there are probably some rules common to all patterns with a degree of outcome noncorrespondence. In both the PDG and the MDG the shift from D to C that consists of “giving up an advantage” is judged to be more cooperative than the similar shift not subject to that interpretation (unpublished data; only weakly true in the Kelley and Stahelski data). Similarly, in both Hero and Battle of the Sexes, which require turn taking for equal outcomes, the move that consists of “offering” to give the partner a turn after having had one is seen as more cooperative than the move interpretable as “asking” for one’s turn after the partner has had his. Biases in the Attribution of Transformations An unpublished study by Kelley and Patterson suggests that even in close, romantic relationships there may be a tendency to perceive oneself as making a max joint transformation to a greater degree than the partner does. Members of young heterosexual dating couples rated their satisfaction-dissatisfaction with common events in their relationship. For the example shown in Figure 8.3: You and your partner want to see different movies. Rate your satisfaction for the four cases in which (a) you go together to the movie you prefer, (b) you go to your preferred movie and your partner goes to his/hers, (c) you go together to the movie your partner prefers, and (d) you go to the movie your partner prefers and he/she goes to the one you prefer. Ratings were made on a —10 to +10 scale for both self and partner, the latter affording evidence of how the partner is perceived to react to the four situations. It is not surprising that the pattern of results (Figure 8.3) shows a large correspondent MBC component: the person has a strong interest in going with the partner, regardless of the movie, and attributes the same interest to the partner (shown by the estimates of the partner’s ratings in parentheses). Moreover, the person reports somewhat more satisfaction if the jointly selected movie is the one preferred by the partner rather than the one preferred by the self. This evidence that the person’s satisfaction depends in part on the partner’s does not find its parallel in the outcomes imputed to the partner. The partner is seen to derive more ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION Self (A) A's B's preferred preferred movie movie A's preferred movie Partner (B) B's preferred movie Figure 8.3 Own outcomes and estimates of partner’s outcomes (in parentheses) for choice of movies. satisfaction from the joint attendance at his/her preferred movie than from going together to the movie preferred by the self. In other words, the typical subject sees himself/herself as giving more weight to the partner’s outcomes than the partner gives to the subject’s outcomes. This result was replicated for five other interdependence situations similar to that in Figure 8.3. It was also apparent in a direct rating procedure in which the person rated the overall desirability of various combinations of own and partner’s ‘“outcomes’” and made estimates of the desirability for the partner of the same combinations. Own sense of desirability reflected toa greater degree the partner’s “outcomes” (relative to own ‘‘outcomes”) than was perceived to be true for the partner’s experience of desirability. A rather similar result has recently been obtained by Michael Ross (personal communication). When members of couples are asked to estimate their percent contributions to various activities (What percent of the breakfasts do you prepare? What percent of the waiting do you do?), the two estimates consistently add up to more than 100%. In other words, one or both persons overestimate the contributions the self makes to the welfare of the couple. Although this result is subject to a variety of interpretations, Ross suggests the plausible idea that it may reflect differential availability in memory of relevant events (Iversky and Kahneman, 1973). When the person makes a judgment of own versus partner’s contributions, instances of the former come more readily to mind. A similar interpretation may be made of the Kelley and Patterson results. Each person may generally be more aware of instances in which he/she does things out of consideration of the partner’s preference than of instances in which the partner reciprocates. The counter self-interest (discordant RC) makes such actions salient to the actor, but a desire to reflect a genuine considerateness in the action inhibits explicit expression of the overridden self-interest. (Such expression would threaten to define the action as an instrumental move to elicit a reciprocation of the benefit.) Thus the considerate act may often be salient for the self but go unnoticed by the partner. Strategy or Social Motive? McClintock (1972a) has observed that subjects’ choices in mixed-motive games may have proximal (immediate) or distal (ulterior) goals and that the ambiguities involved in deciding which goal is being pursued pose a major interpretive problem for the scientist. It is not only for the scientist that this constitutes a problem but also undoubtedly for the naive participant, the observer—partner. As noted in Chapter 7, McClintock draws the distinction between choices that represent a simple and direct expression of a motive or goal and those that are an indirect expression of a goal. The latter are instrumental or strategic acts; for example, “’. . . a strategy devised to convince the other player to make choices which will permit you to realize your goal of maximizing own gain” (p. 281). Thus an observer may be deceived into believing that an actor’s move reflects a motive of genuinely friendly cooperativeness when in fact it represents a manipulation strategy designed to further his own ulterior interests. The research and theory of Jones (Jones, 1964; Jones and Wortman, 1973) document the use of this kind of strategy by the ingratiator who attempts to protect his long-time interests by disarming interdependent others. It will be noticed that McClintock’s distinction between social motive and strategy is analogous to the one we have made between two kinds of transformation (cf. Chapter 6): mathematical operations performed on the given matrix values (outcome transformations) and sequential rules (or sequential transformations). The success of an instrumental strategy, for example, one of ingratiation, can be said to depend on confusing one type of transformation with another. Specifically, the strategy depends on mistakenly identifying a sequential transformation as being a transformation of the outcome values. In McClintock’s analysis (and also in Jones’s) the sequential transformation is typically in the service of an “antisocial’’ motive—self-aggrandizement, exploitation—whereas the outcome transformation simulates a ‘‘prosocial’’ intention—a compliment ora gulling gambit of cooperation. More generally, though, there is no reason why strategies (sequential transformations) cannot be guided by motives that are fully as prosocial as those that guide some (but not all) outcome transformations. As we have seen, in some patterns of interdependence involving MBC prosocial values can be realized only by ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION sequential rules. Nevertheless, it probably remains true that many attributional errors are made when strategies are used in a deceptive way for manipulative ends. The basic problems of self-presentation and attribution appear to be whether to show one’s motives openly and honestly regardless of their “prosocial” or ‘antisocial’ character and whether to be suspicious in interpreting what the other has shown. These questions seem to resolve into the larger contextual question of where the interest of the interdependent parties lies. In the next section we try to demonstrate that an answer to this larger question requires an analysis of the degree of outcome correspondence and the stability (or transiency) of the relationship. DYNAMIC SEQUENCES We are concerned in this section with self-presentational and attributional processes that accompany the developments or evolutions by which relationships take form and proceed toward stability or, on the other hand, experience increasing conflict that leads to mutually destructive behavior and/or termination of the relationship. In these dynamic sequences the display and correct reading of goals and intentions becomes important not only as a symptom of whether the relationship is moving toward stability or disruption but also as a causal input that accelerates or decelerates the movement. We begin the analysis by considering the tension that exists between mutual and unilateral interest as criteria for action in the relationship. In Chapter 7 we showed that interdependence patterns provide settings in which both prosocial and egoistic transformations may reward the individual. The consequences for a person of any particular transformation depend on both the pattern of interdependence and the transformations the partner is making or is disposed to make. It is plain, then, that before embarking ona line of action it behooves each member to attain a correct understanding of the degree of correspondence in the given matrix. If outcomes are objectively congruent, then the member can make the prosocial overture—show the value he places on cooperation—with some confidence that his partner will reciprocate. On the other hand, if the pattern of the given matrix is highly noncorrespondent, each member’s unilateral interest, prescribing an antisocial transformation, dominates his decision. If the member incorrectly interprets the given matrix as correspondent and accordingly makes a prosocial overture, he will be vulnerable to the other member’s self-interested action. However, it is maximally to the member’s advantage—when he is confident that the pattern is noncorrespondent—to conceal his intention to move competitively and to encourage the other member to interpret the situation as being truly harmonious. What is prescribed in the foregoing paragraph for relationships that are grounded in an objective conflict of interest holds clearly only for transient encounters or for relationships in which the worst action available is not seriously damaging. The competitive action of one member may lead to attempts at retaliation by the others but no serious escalation of conflict can develop—the encounter is terminated or the retaliation is as harmless as the competitive provocation. But when the objectively conflicted relationship has a long future and one from which there is no exit, as in a marriage whose partners have very poor CL,),, or two powerful nations on a small planet, a common interest may develop in controlling the (possibly) mutually destructive escalation of conflict. This common interest is an objective one; it has definite consequences and it modifies the given matrix by adding an element of outcome correspondence. Adding this degree of harmony of interest to the motivational mix makes it adaptive for both members to take accurate account of the noncorrespondence in the given matrix (and to show one another that accurate account has been taken). Unless both members have an accurate understanding of the degree of real disharmony of interest, one of them may start an escalation of the conflict by underestimating its true degree (and thus irresistibly inviting the other’s escalating move) or overestimating it (and making the move himself) by failing to perceive the element of common interest. When the relationship involves both common interest and conflict of interest (the mixed-motive game, intermediate between correspondence and noncorrespondence), then problems of presenting and inferring one another’s transformational tendencies become severe. As we noted in Chapter 7, these relationships create a tension between prosocial and egoistic or antisocial transformations. As shown in Figure 8.4, there is a mutual interest in moving from the latter types of transformation in the lower portion of the figure to the prosocial transformations exemplified by the max other and max joint outcome transormations. On the other hand, if one person is operating at one of the higher levels, his partner often finds aunilateral advantage, at least in the short run, in adopting one of the more egoistic criteria for action. The processes shown in Figure 8.4 may be taken to represent, by the upward pointing arrow on the right, the formation and development of the relationship through the building of mutual trust and, by the downward arrows on the left, the escalation of conflict. These two processes ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION Max other Max joint Unilateral Macon Mutual interest interest Max relative gain Figure 8.4 The tension between mutual and unilateral interest in various criteria for action. depend critically on the self-presentations and attributions that are made in the relationship. We will analyze the two processes separately. Development of the Relationship The formation process is characterized by a series of decisions by each individual, decisions that are usually, though not always, quite implicit and unselfconscious. At each decision point the individual elects whether to “move further into” the relationship (and how much, at what rate) or to drop out of it. The former involves “giving more” to the relationship and becoming more dependent on the partner’s reciprocated benefits. The latter alternative includes physically remaining in interaction but doing so on false terms—appearing to make a further commitment but with no personal intention to fulfill the contractual terms being implicitly evolved. Because trust-inducing initiatives may be ambiguous when action is taken simultaneously (Swinth, 1967), we present the process as a series of steps involving alternating moves and countermoves. Step 1. The individual's decision to move further into the relationship is made on the basis of some increase in certainty that (a) the relationship will be rewarding (and low in cost) and (b) he will not be exploited or abruptly abandoned. Increased certainty about the reward qualities and dependability of the other rests on attributions concerning more or less stable dispositions of the other. Has he the ability to produce the kinds of outcome that are rewarding to self? From Jones and Goethals (1971) it seems clear that abilities are perceived to be stable over time and that early samples of high-level performance create strong primacy effects that cause the observer to expect future performances to be equally impressive. Hence this research suggests that early samples containing highly valid indicators of talent, especially when direct, unmediated, observation of the other’s products is possible (Thibaut and Ross, 1969), should heighten the certainty that early rewards are not accidental or transient. By the same token early samples of inferior performance relevant to the production of rewarding outcomes should lead to decisions to break off the relationship. Heightened assurance of not being exploited or abandoned is based on cues that the other person can be depended on, trusted to reciprocate appropriately, and to respond in the same terms as are implied by one’s own actions. This impression of the other’s dependability derives from assessments that (a) he is dependent on the relationship, (b) his interests and your own overlap in a sufficient degree of common interest, and (c) he intends to act out of consideration of your and the common interest, that is, to make a prosocial transformation of the matrix. Workers under the same supervisor exemplify the kind of situation in which cues of this sort abound. The workers are related to one another in a more or less stable “balance” of power and they share large areas of common interest. Their intentions toward one another may be regarded as honest and are supported by commitments to widely shared norms. Step 2. The decision to ‘move further into” the relationship was based on some assurance that the relationship would be both rewarding and dependable. At the same time the decision entails actions or moves designed to increase the other person’s certainty in the same two respects and thereby to induce a reciprocal “confirming” or “‘validating’” move from him. (To say that the decision was so designed does not mean that it may not be motivated and interpreted differently, especially if the move is very large and very fast—‘“‘coming on too strong.” This consideration is dealt with later.) Thus the latent ‘“message’”’ to the other person is (a) the ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION relationship with me will be rewarding for you and low in cost; and (b) I am dependable and intend to fulfill the terms implied by my behavior. [As above, this implication of dependability may include suggestions that (a) I too am dependent on the relationship, (b) our interests are convergent, hence I will not be tempted to harm you, and (c) lam committed to following the same rules and norms that you are. | Making the initiating move that reassures the other party and invites his confirming countermove is part of Osgood’s (1962) proposal for “graduated reciprocation in tension reduction.”” A simplified version has been tested in the laboratory by Pilisuk and Skolnick (1968). Subjects played an extended form of the PDG with a scenario that employed the language of international tension; for example, armament, disarmament, mutual inspection. Some of the subjects were paired with programmed opponents who played a matching (tit-for-tat) or a conciliatory strategy that prescribed a play on trialn + 1 that was one degree (one “‘missile”’) less aggressive (or more friendly) than that of the subject on trial. Thus both programmed strategies were matching strategies but the conciliatory strategy also contained a unilateral initiative toward disarmament. An additional sample of paired subjects played ‘‘naturally,” that is, without any programmed intervention. Cross cutting the foregoing treatments was an inspection variation that permitted half the pairs a display of intentions (the programmed ‘‘opponents” were always honest) about subsequent moves. The results suggest that the Osgood proposal for integrating small, consistent, unilateral initiatives of friendliness with an honest prior declaration of intentions does produce significantly more cooperation than is found in natural pairs but only marginally more cooperation than is generated by the comparable matching strategy. The evidence in this study for the trust-enhancing contribution of the initiating move is thus only suggestive. (The authors indicate a possible artifact produced by the values in the payoff matrix that might, under the conciliatory strategy, have put a ceiling on further cooperation.) In any case, there is further evidence of the importance of the initiating move. We might ask about some of the specific cues that could lead the other person to interpret one’s initiating move as implying dependability. These cues would seem to include any evidence that the move has involved some cost, that it has been made in the face of risks or other obstacles. [Swinth (1967) shows that accepting risks and incurring costs (foregoing gains) act in the same way to develop trust. ] If one’s initiating move is perceived to entail some sacrifice of one’s own interests, the other person will be more likely to attribute it toa dependable source, hence to make a validating reciprocation. Pruitt’s (1968) research suggests that this is so. Subjects receiving a standard reward reciprocated more generously the smaller the resources they imputed to the person rewarding them. Step 3. The decision to move further into the relationship serves not only to reassure the other person that the relationship will be rewarding and dependable; it also tends to be committing in several ways. First, the move constitutes a tacit agreement to continue and to enlarge the relationship, at least in a further exploratory way. Moreover, if the move is public, if it is visible or otherwise communicated to relevant other persons—to the ‘‘field of eligibles” (Winch, 1952)—it tends to cause alternative partners to back away and to withdraw any aspirations they might have to form a relationship with either of the dyadic members. This receding of the alternatives has the effect of heightening the costs to the dyadic members of breaking off their interaction. (These comments, of course, apply only to relationships that are mutually exclusive or incompatible with the developing one, this being the conceptual meaning of alternative.) Again, if the move has been public, it may stimulate the surrounding social system to take part in enforcing the continued solidarity of the dyad. This will be true when explicit social rituals—initiation or induction ceremonies—confirm the formation and adjure the preservation of a relationship. Step 4. The process so far has entailed (in Step 1) the individual's decision to move further in the relationship, based on some increased certainty that it will be rewarding and dependable, and (in Step 2) actions designed to increase the other person’s certainty that it will be rewarding and dependable for him. Such actions or moves tend (in Step 3) to commit the actor to the relationship. Now (in Step 4), if the “move further’ has been successful in transmitting the promise of a rewarding and dependable relationship, it reduces the other person’s uncertainty in this regard and creates the conditions that encourage him to make the next move. Thus, in general, the formation process can be considered as an exchange of actions or messages that reduce uncertainty or increase the mutual assurance that the relationship will endure and be worth enduring. As the mutual assurance steadily increases during the early formative period, each member may perceive that he is being evaluated by the other in an increasingly positive way. Each person may thus experience the ascending sequence of evaluations studied in the experiment by Aronson and Linder (1965) in which female subjects overheard evaluations being made of them at repeated intervals by another girl (an experimental confederate). Because the subjects were led to believe that the confederate was unaware that she was being overheard, the subjects could not attribute the evaluations to any attempt to flatter or openly insult them. During each of the intervals between the evaluations the subject ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION was required by the ostensible purpose of the experiment to talk with the confederate fora few minutes. Under the various experimental conditions the overheard evaluations gradually improved from initially negative to finally positive, deteriorated from initially positive to finally negative, or were steadily positive or steadily negative. Postexperimental assessments of the evaluator revealed that she was liked best in the first condition when her evaluations gradually changed from negative to positive. Research on bargaining and gaming has shown some parallel effects in comparing the consequences of different schedules of concessions or cooperative-competitive play. Benton, Kelley, and Liebling (1972) report that a bargaining opponent who commences with extreme demands and gradually moves to more moderate ones is evaluated as having been fairer than one who begins with moderate demands and persists with them throughout. Moreover, with the former opponent the subject feels greater responsibility for the outcome, greater success in influencing the partner, and greater satisfaction with the negotiation. In reviewing research on programmed strategies in the PDG, Oskamp (1971) summarizes the consistent findings that a shift from a low to a high rate of cooperation is more effective in inducing subjects to cooperate than a consistently high rate of cooperation. Although the temptation to exploit the sucker (the consistent cooperator) may account for these PDG results, a more general interpretation would seem to be required to account for the more favorable effect found for all of the foregoing ascending schedules: increasingly cooperative PDG programs, extreme to moderate bargaining demands, and negative to positive evaluations in the Aronson and Linder experiment. The plausible possibility is that the subject may experience the security that derives from a sense of control and mastery over his social environment, attributing to himself the causality for the positive trends in the other person’s behavior. A Dilemma In taking an action to reassure the other person that the relationship will be both rewarding and dependable (Step 2), the individual faces a dilemma. On the one hand, the move further is not meaningful to the other person if it consists only of what has already been thoroughly justified by the other’s prior action. It is necessary, if the other person is to be induced to make his move further (Step 4), that one’s own action constitute an initiative, an indication of one’s personal intention to move further, and not simply what is demanded by the other’s earlier contributions. To ensure Step 4, one’s move must embody more than simply matching or catching up with what the other’s actions have already justified. The foregoing observations imply that the process proceeds by risk taking and, if both persons are to experience a reduction of uncertainty, ideally both would take risks. (If, however, one person is more secure in his interpersonal relationships than the other, he may have to take the lead in the risk taking and perhaps receive assurance by the other’s following; but even this process can constitute symmetrical risk taking. The insecure partner communicates his anxiety and, given that context, even his lower-level increases in commitment are seen and felt as risk taking.) We have said that one must make a move that is not perceives’ io be simply the effect caused by the other person’s prior actions. On the other hand, if in making the move further (in Step 2) the components of the message are emphasized too strongly (capabilities to produce rewards, dependence, and dependability) then the reassurance gained from the other person’s subsequent move (in Step 4) is endangered. The sheer size of own move may then suggest his motivation for remaining in the relationship: he only wants to get the reward or to exploit trust and dependence. Another possible consequence of making a move of too great a magnitude is that too large a move, ‘coming on too strong,’’ may be interpreted by the other as an aggressively dependent overture: he is being overwhelmed with rewards for which he will be asked a costly repayment in the future. That persons are wary of and resist this possibility of future exploitation is suggested by an experiment by Brehm and Cole (1966). When the situation is perceived to be important, subjects who were unexpectedly given a soft drink by a confederate helped the confederate less in a subsequent activity (stacking papers) than subjects who had not been given the soft drink. Similarly, Schopler and Thompson (1968) have demonstrated that when the setting is “formal” (but not when it is informal’) the receipt of a favor (a flower) leads to less willingness subsequently to help the confederate (by assenting to wash blouses) than when no favor was done. Schopler and Thompson interpret their results in terms of the attributions made of the donor’s motives: that he is preoccupied with the recipient in the informal condition and with his own requirements in the formal one. The dilemma then is how to make a move meaningfully greater than the other’s prior moves have warranted (to constitute a reassurance to him) but not so great as to put in question to you his subsequent move or to put in question to him your intentions. This process of developing trust, as we have just described it, takes place in the early stages of relationships when dangers and uncertainties abound. If the initial contacts indicate to either of the potential partners that the given matrix is too extremely noncorrespondent, then there is too ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION little basis for the development of trust or for the adoption of prosocial transformations (see Chapter 7). On the other hand, if the matrix is extremely correspondent, there is also no basis for the development of trust, for there is nothing to risk, hence no test of willingness to take risks: cooperative overtures will be attributed to the structure of the situation rather than to dispositional (or pattern-transforming) properties of the participants. Therefore it is in the middle regions of the continuum of outcome correspondence, in which elements of both conflict and cooperation are present as temptations, that attributions of trust have their origins. Here, also, conflict can escalate. Escalation of Conflict The process by which conflict develops is in many ways the simple reverse of the process of trust building. Competitive and destructive behaviors replace the cooperative and constructive as the directions taken in the processes summarized in Figure 8.4; but there is more to it than that. A crucial difference between the two processes is that whereas the upward movements of trust development in Figure 8.4 require a mutual assent—a conjunctive responsibility—the downward movements of conflict development can be started and maintained by unilateral action. This process has been analyzed by Kelley and Stahelski (1970b). After subjects had been instructed in the PDG, they were asked to decide what their goal would be in playing the game with another person, whether they wanted to establish a cooperative relationship with him or intended to play competitively. This decision about intentions reflects roughly the dispositional properties of the subjects. In pairs of subjects with different goals, one having selected the cooperative goal and the other, the competitive goal, the cooperator is poorly equipped to show his cooperative intention. His cooperative play will be exploited, and if he plays the other (D) alternative it will be interpreted not as an attempt to defend himself but as an act of aggression. Thus, faced with a determined competitor in the PDG, the cooperator has no way of turning the play toward cooperation. He must play the competitive alternative in self-defense and the relationship rapidly becomes one of mutual punishment. The competitor, meanwhile, is quite unaware of his causal role in producing the conflict, mistakenly assuming that everyone else, like himself, has competitive intentions. Although the basic experiment of the Kelley and Stahelski research is the PDG, the authors report similar effects from other studies, using, for example, the game of Chicken and another (modeled after the Deutsch and Krauss trucking game) in which the two players must share a limited facility that only one at a time can use. In these games, as well, the cooperator’s behavior rapidly assimilates to that of the competitor: competition dominates. These two games share with the PDG a critical property: the cooperator has no unambiguous way of communicating his cooperative intention. He has only the choice between being systematically exploited or making a move in which his effort to defend himself is likely to be attributed to an aggressive intent. In these circumstances, and the real world situations to which they generalize, one determined aggressor can start a process that irresistibly generates reciprocal aggression. The assimilative effects we have described may not occur if the repertory of possible behaviors is expanded. Miller and\Holmes (1975) have studied this possibility in the context of an expanded PDG (see Figure 8.5) in which a withdrawal alternative is added to the PDG. This alternative permits the cooperator to protect himself from severe damage while clearly communicating his lack of aggressive intent. Miller and Holmes show that the withdrawal response does indeed protect the cooperator from being assimilated to the competitor’s aggressive overtures. Unilateral aggression does not start an irresistible escalation of conflict. A Defensive C D withdrawal G . eee Defensive withdrawal Figure 8.5 An expanded PDG, adapted from Miller and Holmes (1975). We have commented earlier on other factors that may inhibit the escalation of conflict. When the relationship contemplates a long future of ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION coexistence from which exit is difficult and in which uncontrolled conflict can be damaging to both sides, a perception of the common interest may produce caution. Then, it can be hoped, rashness in initiating aggression will be curbed and, if aggression occurs by mistake or momentary impulse, the response will not be immediate retaliation in kind but rather the functional equivalent of a defensive withdrawal. s i a a e time rages e in LL enea, dike “anveity, ‘tt sia

