Interdependence in Triads Components of Triadic Interdependence, 244 Person C’s Effects on the A-B Relationship, 246 Analysis of A’s and B’s Outcome in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship, 246 Alternative Method of Analysis, 248 C’s Control Components, 250 Specific Interventions by C, 250 Changing the Value and Meaning of Behavior, 250 Changing the Correspondence between A’s and B’s Outcomes, 255 Facilitating the A-B Relationship, 258 Disrupting the A-B Relationship, 261 The Dyad’s Power over C, 262 Analysis of C’s Outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship, 262 A and B’s Controls over C, 263 Triads Based on Compounded Dyadic Relations, 268 Types of Constant-Sum Game in the Triad, 271 Outcome Correspondence and Cognitive Balance in the Triad, 275 SSN a wa Vanes oa! re c I afi S i j PLL a Ci a et ae ao i ie liar i Leo —ayreny) apy we ae a er Po wien soe sin: sUheTe i et ma vig vr i hid > 3 m Wh NGil A =e. j i P “Sil al sqrPrniyt 7s ots ; as “WA ties tleiias i baat oli tall stant) Bebe rwecatras las ee att —~s is + Mie wit Gh eee ents S.-~ of) dense ertia) aS Je ABSTRACT An analysis is made of the components of triadic interdependence. This analysis provides the basis for a discussion of the third person’s possible effects on the dyad—how the dyad can be strengthened, changed, or disrupted by a representative of the social environment. Attention is then focused on the consequences for the third person of the dyad’s behavior, viewed in terms of the power of the dyad over the ‘‘outsider.”’ In final sections consideration is given to full-blown, three-way interdependence with special emphasis on some phenomena unique to the triad (relative to the dyad). We now consider the consequences for the dyad of the actions of a third person. In adding the third person to our analysis, we are not simply interested in its generalization to the triad, although that is one of our purposes. We also view the third person as epitomizing the social context in which the dyad exists. The ways in which person C can affect the A-B pair reveal how the dyad can be strengthened, changed, or disrupted by its social environment. The ways in which the pair can cope with C’s interventions reveal their resources for dealing with external social opportunities and threats. Among the many ways in which C can affect the interaction between A and B only certain ones are considered here. An important distinction is whether C affects the interdependence between A and B or whether he merely affects the process by which they cope with a particular pattern of interdependence. As an example of the latter, he may provide signals to help them to solve a coordination problem (just as the coxswain performs this function for larger groups). Another example would be the escrow officer at a bank who handles the process details that ensure that the terms of a contract are met by both sides before an exchange is made. In a sense his role is to guarantee simultaneity of action according to agreement. Other examples would involve C’s aid to the pair in understanding their interdependence, his help in the intercommunication of intentions, and his decisions on their behalf as an arbitrator when the conflict prevents them from making their own (see Thibaut and Walker, 1975, for further analysis of this process). Our analysis excludes such contributions to process and is restricted to the third person’s effect on the interdependence between A and B. It does, however, include examples in which C plays a role in the evocation of values, for, as we have seen, they affect the way in which A and B are effectively interdependent. Patterns of interdependence in the triad are far more complicated than those in the dyad. In the interest of clear presentation we focus first on A’s and B’s respective outcomes and the impact on them of C’s actions. This forms the basis for considering the interplay between A and B as an ongoing dyad and C as an intervening “outsider.” Subsequently we consider how C’s outcomes vary within the three-way relationship. This focuses our attention on the consequences for him of A’s and B’s actions and affords the means of analyzing their power over him. Then, the two-versus-one perspective is set aside for a full-blown, three-person analysis and we consider some phenomena unique to the triad. This constitutes the first step in generalizing the dyadic analysis to larger multiperson groups, although we have left that for others to do. COMPONENTS OF TRIADIC INTERDEPENDENCE It is necessary first to orient ourselves to the complexities that are introduced, at least potentially, by extending the analysis to the level of the triad. This is conveniently done in terms of the components of interdependence that exist in the triad. Figure 9.1 reminds us of the relation between the components of interdependence in the dyad and the analysis of variance paradigm. As we stated in Chapter 2, dyadic interdependence is analogous to an experimental design in which there are two independent variables (the two persons A andB) and two dependent variables (A’s and B’s respective outcomes). The analysis of variance model reveals that there may be three sources of variance in each person’s outcomes, his own main effect (RC), the partner’s main effect (FC), and their joint effect (BC). These three sources account for the variance of each set of outcomes Source of Person affected Control A B A RC, FC, B FC, RC, eae AxB BC, BC, Figure 9.1 The components of dyadic interAverage GM, GMsz dependence expressed in terms of the analysis of variance. around its particular average level or grand mean (GM). The three sources of variance are referred to as types of control. The subscript following each control term in the figure denotes the person affected by it. Figure 9.2 shows the same analysis made for the triad. There are now three independent variables, corresponding to the three persons, and three dependent variables, corresponding to their respective outcomes. The number of possible sources of variance in each person’s outcomes is increased to seven. It becomes necessary to supplement the subscripts following each control term (which indicate the person affected by it) with subscripts preceding each term to indicate the person or persons who exercise the control. Thus ,FC¢ refers to fate control exercised by A over person C. The necessity for this double coding is apparent. Three possible sources of fate control act on A, one exercised by B, a second, by C, anda third, by B and C, acting jointly (g-¢FC 4). The same is true for each person and for BC as well. If the reader finds it confusing that the three-way interaction terms translate into BC exercised over a person by the joint actions of his two partners, it might be well to review the meaning of BC in the dyadic components. The ,BC, term reflects the joint effect on A’s outcome of his and B’s actions. By virtue of this joint effect, when B modifies his action, the BC component creates a reason for A to modify his also, hence, the behavior control. Similarly, the effect of the A x B x C interaction on A’s outcomes (gcBC ,) implies that because all three persons jointly exercise an effect on A’s outcomes, if B and C jointly change their actions his distribution of outcomes provides a reason for A to make a corresponding shift in his action. The reader will note that the subscripts preceding the RC terms have been omitted. They are made unnecessary by the definition of RC: only A can exercise reflexive control over A. Source of Person affected ‘Control A B G A RC, aFCg aFCec B pFC, RC, pECc cFC, cFC, RCc A xB BC, aBCpg apECe A X~E cBG, acECs aBCec Bexee pcFC, cBC, pBCc I XS 133 CE pcBC, acBC, apBCc Average GM, GMg3 GMce Figure9.2 The components of triadic interdependence expressed in terms of the analysis of variance. It is apparent that the introduction of a third person greatly increases the complexity of the analysis. Compared with the six control components to be considered in the dyad (in Figure 9.1), there are twenty-one such components for the triad (Figure 9.2). To facilitate our thinking about this extensive array of components we first limit our consideration to A’s and B’s outcomes, that is, to the A and B columns of Figure 9.2. Here are listed the original six terms local to the A-B dyad and the additional eight terms that in one way or another involve C’s exercise of control. Then, when questions are raised about the power of A andB over C, it will be necessary to take account of the seven terms in the C column of Figure 9.2, in which C’s outcomes are subject to various types of control. PERSON C’s EFFECTS ON THE A-B RELATIONSHIP Analysis of A’s and B’s Outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship The pattern of A’s andB’s outcomes ina triadic relationship in which each person has two response alternatives can be represented by the pair of matrices in Figure 9.3. These are simply the two halves of the 2 x 2 x 2 cube, corresponding to C’s separate responses, c,; and c,. This mode of representing the relationship is convenient because it highlights the change in the A-B relationship produced by C’s shifts in behavior. Figure 9.3. Representation of the 2 x2 x2 relationship asitinvolvesA’s andB’s outcomes. Figure 9.3 shows a case in which C can by his choice of actions determine whether A and B are related in the manner of Chicken (c,) or PDG (c2). As can be seen, C’s action also affects the variance and the average st OnmmataO level of outcomes between the two patterns. A complete analysis of this three-way relationship appears in Figure 9.4, the original 2 x 2 x 2 pattern at the top and its components arrayed below it. Whereas in the analysis of 2 x 2 relations the components are portrayed in successive 2 x 2 matrices, here the components of the 2 x 2 x 2 pattern are shown in successive pairs of 2 X 2 matrices. The components of the analysis correspond to the seven pairs of terms in the A and B columns of Figure 9.2, although ina slightly different order. The first three terms are the familiar ones involving only A and/orB and can be readily calculated by averaging the c, and c, matrices and analyzing the average matrix. The remaining four terms involve C’s sole or joint control over A’s and B’s outcomes. The fate control C exercises over the others reflects the difference between the two matrices in average outcomes. Thus cFC, is readily calculated by averaging A’s outcomes in the c, and c, matrices and taking the difference. The next two terms can be calculated by averaging separately over A and overB. TheB x C matrix obtained by averaging over A can be analyzed into its components to show cBC, and gcFC,. Similarly, the analysis of the A x C matrix obtained by averaging over B reveals cBC, and 4cFCs. Once all the terms are calculated ,¢cBC, and ,4cBC, can be calculated as a remainder in a manner similar to that used for determining the MBC component of a 2 x 2 matrix; that is, values are entered in the lowermost matrices of Figure 9.4, as needed, to make the seven pairs of component matrices add up to the original ones. The clue that the books are balanced is that the matrices for scBC, and ,cBC,; have regular behavior control patterns, although reversed in direction between the left and right matrices, as in Figure 9.4. Alternative Method of Analysis An alternative and simpler way to calculate the components of the2 x2 Xx 2 matrix begins with the components of thec ,;and c, matrices (Figure 9.3). This method is important because it highlights the precise ways in which C, by the controls he exercises, can alter the pattern of the relationship between A and B. The notation and formulas are given in Figure 9.5. The analyses of c,and c, matrices proceed as usual; the terms are given signs according to their orientation with respect to the a,b, cell of each 2 x 2 matrix. (The formulas yield signs according to the components’ orientations to the a,b,c, cell of the 2 x 2 x 2 matrix.) Components that yield high values in that cell are given positive signs and those yielding low values are given negative signs. (This rule has been followed in giving signs to the component weights in Figure 9.4). The seven pairs of formulas are then applied to yield the indicated seven pairs of components. The reasonableness of the first three pairs of formulas will be apparent to the reader. Person A’s RC, for the entire relationship is simply the averaging of his RCs for its two halves. These formulas accomplish the averaging Over c,and cy. The fourth pair of formulas takes account of the fact that C’s fate control is reflected in any change between c, and c, in average level of outcomes. The rationale underlying the last three formulas can be seen by referring to the corresponding component matrices in Figure 9.4. The -BC,, term refers to the fact that A’s RC shifts from one side to the other with a shift betweenc,and cy». Thus C’s behavior control over A is greater when A’s RC in the two matrices operates in different directions than, for example, when it operates in the same direction. In the formula the difference between RC’, and RC", takes account of this fact. Similarly, s-FC ,is larger to the degree that whenC makes one choice B’s fate control over A is strong in one direction, and when C makes the other choice it is strong in the other direction. Again, the difference between FC’, and FC", reflects this fact. The same reasoning applies to the g-cBC , component, which is large when B’s behavior control over A is reversed in direction by a shift in C’s choice. Matrix Terms for the Components Cy RC’,, RC’s, FC’,, FC’, BC’,,.BC’s, GM'a, GM's Cp RC",, RC"s, FC",, FC"s, BC”,, BC”s, GM",, GM"; ce RC, = 1/2 (RC’, + RC’,) RCg3 = 1/2 (RC’s + RC’s) pas pPC, = 1/24FC' 7° FCs) AFC, = 1/2 (FC’s + FC"s) sBC, = 1/2 (BC’, + BC",) aBCg = 1/2 (BC’s + BC"s) cFC, = GM’, — GM", cFC, = GM’; — GM"; Oy cBC, oa 1/2 (RC', Pid RC") cBC, = 1/2 (RC’s Ts RC’"s) BcFC,4 = 1/2 (FC’,4 — FC",) acFCg = 1/2 (FC’s — FCs) ie pcBC, = 1/2 (BC’, — BC",) acBCg = 1/2 (BC’s — BC"s) Figure 9.5 Formulas for calculating components of the AXBXC matrix from the components of the c, and c, matrices. In the example shown in Figure 9.4 the last three terms act to change the magnitude of components between c , and C,, serving (a) to introduce the RCs inc,, although there was none inc ,, (b) to increase the magnitude of the FCs incy, and (c) to eliminate the BCs present inc,. The first and last of these changes are necessary, of course, to shift the relationship from the pattern of Chicken to that of PDG. C’s Control Components Figure 9.5 tells us how to calculate the components of the 2 x 2 x 2 relationship from the components of the two halves c, and c». Alternatively, we can view the formulas in terms of what they show about how C’s control terms change the A-B relationship; that is, we can examine the formulas to see what C control term must exist to form a shift between c, andc,in any aspect of the A-B relationship. Similarly, the formulas show the aspect of the relationship that is changed if any particular C control component is present. The effect of C’s control components may be summarized as follows: 1. The (FC ,and -FC,components do not change the pattern between the c, and c, matrices because they do not affect the RC, FC, or BC components of those matrices; C’s fate control simply changes the general level of outcomes. 2. In contrast to FC, and CFC, the lower three pairs of components in Figure 9.5 do serve to change the nature of the relationship between A and B asC shifts betweenc,andc,. Thus any change in the pattern of the relationship between A and B can be traced to one or more of the last three types of C’s control. 3. The -BC, and -BC; components change the direction and/or magnitude of A’s and B’s RC, between the c, and c, submatrices. 4. The gcFC, and ,4-FC,; components change the direction and/or magnitude of B’s fate control over A and A’s fate control over B, respectively, between the c, and c, submatrices. 5. The gcBC, and ,4cBCs components permit C to change the magnitude and/or direction of sBC , and ,BC,. One possible consequence of this kind of control is that C’s choice determines the nature of the coordination required between A and B. This is true when the ;,BC , and ABC, terms are correspondent, as in the lower-most matrices of Figure 9.4. Specific Interventions by C Changing the Value and Meaning of Behavior No attempt has been made systematically to examine the possible antecedents of C’s types of control over the A-B relationship. Some examples, however, will serve to suggest types of antecedent and the consequences of C’s possessing various types of control. It is easy to imagine the circumstances under which C would have cFC 4. This component merely requires his possession of commodities that A desires, his ability to act in ways A finds rewarding, or his effectiveness in raising or lowering A’s costs of interaction. Equally familiar are the generic bases for cBC ,. Special combinations of A’s and C’s behavior must be compatible from A’s point of view, these capabilities reflecting facilitation effects with heightened reward and/or reduced costs, or absences of interference effects with reduced rewards and/or increased costs. (See Chapter 3 on Antecedents of the Given Matrix and Chapter 4 in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959.) For example, without C’s help (in statec,) A may prefer doing a, toa». However, when C provides him with a special tool for performing a, or guidance in its appreciation (this help constituting c,), A’s preference may shift to a, in view of the lower costs and/or greater rewards associated with it. A common phenomenon is that the mere presence of another person interferes with the performance of certain behaviors, increasing their costs and reducing the satisfaction the actor derives from them. C’s two actions, c, and cy, may refer to C’s presence and absence. If his presence interferes with one of A’s actions but not the other, then the shift from c, to c; may change whether A prefers a, or a». The other two of C’s control components are more complexly determined. The term g-FC, means that C selectively affects A’s preferences for B’s behaviors. (It also, of course, means equally that B selectively affects A’s preferences for C’s behaviors, but here we are viewing these terms in relation to C’s effects on the A and B relationship.) A simple example is one in which both B and C give A one of two items and the items are such that each has greater value if a person also possesses the other. Thusb,andc, may consist of giving A a small dinghy andb,andc, giving A a nylon sail for the dinghy. Obviously, if C does c,, A will prefer b,, butifC doesc,A will prefer b,. Similarly, A may prefer a glass of wine and a piece of cheese ‘to two glasses of wine or two pieces of cheese. Consequently, b , (wine) will be preferred to b, (cheese) if C gives cheese, but the preference will be reversed if C gives wine. In general, ,-FC, requires that C be able selectively to interfere with or facilitate A’s enjoyment of B’s behaviors. Other examples similar to those for cBC , can be given except that the selective effect of the tools or tutelege that C provides is on A’s appreciation of B’s actions rather than his own. The g-BC, component, representing the most complex configuration of outcomes, is the most difficult to illustrate. In general, C’s shift fromc, to c, changes or redefines what is compatible or incompatible behavior between A and B. If a, and b, represent one opinion on a controversial polarized issue and a, and b,, the opposing opinion, then C’s successful induction of pressure toward agreement (c,) would place value on a,b, and a,b. combinations but his eliciting a norm of independent expression (C,) would place value on a,b, and a,b,. A more trivial example in which C changes the meaning of similarity between A and B is the invitation to a costume ball with a prize for the most striking couple. This invitation (c,) makes it desirable for a husband and wife to coordinate their dress in contrast to the usual party invitation (c,) which carries no such implication. Many examples of s-BC, can be developed from the idea of optimal combinations of two and three tools or instruments. To make music two roommates require an instrument and a score. If C contributes nothing (c,), itis necessary for A to contribute one item and B the other (i.e.,4,b, o0ra,b ,are the preferred combinations.) IfC contributes the score (c.), inasmuch as only one score is needed, the preferred combination for A and B now becomes one in which both provide instruments (a,b,), assuming both enjoy playing more than listening. (Example is imperfect insofar as the a,b, cell, everyone providing a score, is still unrewarding.) Alternative methods of Changing Patterns. We have seen that cBC, changes the direction of RC , between the c, and c, matrices (RC’, versus RC",) and g-FC , changes the direction of sFC , between the two matrices (gFC’, versus pFC”,). Thus the concordance between the RC and FC terms in thec,andc, matrices can be changed in two ways, either by cBC 4 and -BC, which affect the RC terms or by g-FC 4 and ,cFC,; which affect the FC terms. From this it follows that there are alternative ways, shown in Figure 9.6, in which C can change the A-8B relationship from, for example, PDG to MDG. Beginning with discordance between the RC and FC terms in the PDG (c ,) matrix, C’s actions can create concordance either by reversing the direction of the RC terms (as in Case I by means of cBC , and -BC,) or by reversing the direction of the FC terms (as in Case II by means of gcCFC, and ,cFC,). The actions of A and B in Figure 9.6 might refer to those of two small boys who possess different pairs of baseball trading cards. They agree to give each other one card. In thec , matrix, of his two possible actions, boy A slightly prefers (to the extent of 4 units) to give Y and keep X but B strongly prefers (8 units worth) the opposite, that A give X and keep Y. Symmetrically, B somewhat prefers that he give Q and keep P but A strongly prefers that B do the opposite. Thus at c,, without C’s intervention, they are in the typical PDG situation. In Case I C’s intervention is to make each boy value more the one of his own cards that the partner values less by pointing out (though separately to their owners) the virtues of cards Y and Q. This shifts each boy’s preference to giving the other boy the card that boy prefers. In Case II C’s intervention is to make each boy PDG MDG E (2) Gives X Gives Y RC} —- RC’, = —4 Ree, = RC"; 4: RC, = RC, = -4 BCs, — FC’, = +8 Rey, = FC"; = BcEC, = achkCG, = Sig [e) Figure 9.6 Two different ways for C to change the A-B relationship from PDG to MDG. value more the one of his partner’s cards that the partner values less. Again, the value-changing information (e.g., about rarity or quality) would have to be given separately to the two boys or both would change their preferences and the conflict aspect of the PDG would remain. [The example is interesting in that it shows the basis of the PDG in shared preference orderings in the context of agreement to exchange something. In this context C’s RC- and FC-shifting interventions might be communicating preference-shifting information to the interdependent persons but separately so that the preference orders become negatively correlated. | Alternatively, in this example C might accomplish the shift in Case I by invoking the value of generosity and pointing out its implication for giving away to one’s friends the things one likes best. This would decrease each boy’s satisfaction in keeping the card he most prefers and create a reward for giving it. Along the same lines C’s intervention in Case II might consist of emphasizing thealtruistic satisfactions to be gained from observing that one’s friends possess valuable things. If this appeal were effective, each boy would then prefer the other to keep the better card and give away the less valuable one. In any such situation inasmuch as the FC terms are the larger ones in thec,andc, patterns, a stronger degree of control is required of C if he is to succeed in the method illustrated by Case II. In the example given Case II requires that C succeed in reversing a stronger initial preference than that required for Case I. This is shown in Figure 9.6 by the relative absolute magnitudes of g-FC, for Case II and -BC, for Case I. It will probably be apparent to the reader that if C reversed the direction of both the RC and FC terms of the PDG his effect would be simply to interchange the meanings, defined in terms of the pattern, of each person’s response alternatives, the ‘‘cooperative’’ choice becoming the ‘‘defecting’’ choice and vice versa. Thus, if C were able to produce both effects described by Cases I and II by independently changing each boy’s preferences about his own possessions and the partner’s, then the ‘“cooperative exchange” would shift from the X and P cards to the Y and Q. If accomplished by the invocation of generosity and altruistic values, the cooperative exchange would, oddly enough, involve giving the partner the least preferred card so that he could satisfy his altruistic interest but at the expense of being able to satisfy one’s own interest in generosity. Indeed, the ‘exploitative’ person would be one who managed to be generous by giving a valuable card while also feeling altruistic from having received a less valuable one from the partner! We have used the PDG and MDG to illustrate the alternative ways in which C can shift certain AB relationships from one pattern to another. Similar illustrations can be provided for other shifts; for example, between perfectly noncorrespondent combinations of BRC and MFC and perfectly correspondent ones, or between Battle of the Sexes and the matrix to its right in Figure 4.3. Reversible and Irreversible Effects. Not all the ways in which C can affect A’s and B’s outcomes permit him to move back and forth betweenc,andc,at will. This is not a question of which control component he exercises but of the method by which he does so. For example, if C changes A’s preferences regarding his own or B’s action by tutelage in appreciation or by invoking norms about good or valued behavior, C will have no dependable means of undoing what he has done. Some of his effects, then, are likely to be irreversible, with the consequence that the power represented by the relevant control component no longer exists. Changing the Correspondence between A’s and B’s Outcomes One important aspect of C’s effect on the A-B relationship is his impact on the correspondence between their outcomes. This is basic to whether they have a common interest in his actions or conflicting preferences about what he does. This aspect of the analysis is essential to determining whether his influence will be to strengthen their relationship or to weaken it. The analysis of this aspect of C’s effects begins by examining the relevance of each of his types of control to the correspondence or noncorrespondence between A’s and B’s outcomes. If C has fate control over both A and B, he controls a source of positive or negative covariation between their outcomes. If FC, and CFC; are large and have the same sign, they serve to increase markedly the correspondence between A’s and B’s outcomes as calculated over the entire 2 xX 2 X 2 matrix. This is illustrated in Figure 9.7 in which the A-B relationship is a PDG at each RGod = RGs = 4 ERC, = RC pw RC, = RC; = —4 EC, =FC’s =+8 FC", =FC’,; = +8, gFC, = ,FC,; = +8 GM', = GM’; GM", =GM"; = 16 CFC, = cFCs = —10 ICL = —.8 IC" = —.8 [Gea Figure 9.7 Effect of C’s fate control to increase the degree of correspondence between A’s and B’s outcomes over entire 2X22 matrix. level of c; the index of correspondence in each case is —.8. For the entire 2 x2 x2 matrix IC = +.2. When -FC, and (FC; have opposite signs, they serve to increase the noncorrespondence for A and B over the entire matrix. This is illustrated in Figure 9.8. The point of these examples is that as C varies his behavior he either affects A and B in the same way (as in 9.7) or differently (as in 9.8). In the first case they have a common interest to induce C to remain at cy. In the second case A wants him to remain atc, but B prefers him to enactc,. In Figure 9.7 the higher correspondence for the total matrix compared with the separate matrices implies that by intermittent variation in his action’C keeps the entire range of outcomes salient for A and B. They are likely, then, to perceive their common interest (in having C enact c,) rather than their more conflictful relationship at each level of c. The high degree of noncorrespondence for the entire matrix in Figure 9.8 implies that to their partial conflict in the PDG pattern at each level of c has been added a conflict about which action to induce C to take. GM’, = GM’; = GM", = 16 cFC, = —10 GM"; = —4 cFC, =) +10 ICs 8 IC = =78 IC = —291 Figure 9.8 Effect of C’s fate control to increase the degree of noncorrespondence between A’s and B’s outcomes over entire 2x22 matrix. It may be noted that it is meaningful in these situations to refer to the concordance or discordance between -FC , and CFCs. Just as there may be concordance or discordance between a person’s control over his own outcomes and his control over another’s (e.g., RC , may be concordant or discordant with ,FC,), there may also be concordance or discordance between a given person’s control over a second person’s outcomes and his control over a third person’s outcomes. Both types of concordance affect the correspondence between the outcomes of the two affected persons (A and B in the examples). In the case above, the effect of C is to contribute to the correspondence or noncorrespondence between A and B by variation in his action. In the cases to follow C’s change of action produces a change in the correspondence between A and B. In Figure 9.9 C changes the A-B relationship from a noncorrespondent pattern of BRC + MFC to a correspondent one. In the example the means of producing this change is cBC, and cBCg. However, as we have seen, the same shift can be produced alternatively by g-FC, and ,cFC,. It is simply a matter of Noncorrespondent Correspondent RC’, = RC’, = -6 RC”, = RC", = +6 cBC, = cBC, = —6 FC’, = FC’, = +6 FC", = FC", = +6 aFCg = gFC, = +6 Le = 10 IC” = +1.0 IC = .0 Figure 9.9 Effect of -BC, and -BC, in shifting the A-B relationship from noncorrespondent to correspondent. whether C’s shift reverses the direction of the RCs or FCs betweenc, and Cy. In Figure 9.10 C shifts the A-B relationship from noncorrespondent MBC to correspondent MBC. This can be accomplished by using either gcBC 4 Or ,cBC,, the latter being shown in the figure. In both cases the degree of conflict between A and B is higher for one of C’s actions than for the other. By shifting his behavior C can determine whether it is possible for A and B to enjoy their best outcomes at the same time. Obviously, in this manner his action determines the maximum joint outcomes they can achieve. They are likely, then, to have a common interest in inducing C to take the action that heightens the correspondence of their relationship. Bee = +12 Be; a apd sBC, = +12 BC’, = —12 BC’, = +12 ,4cBC,; = —12 IC’ = —1.0 IG = F10 IC = .0 Figure 9.10 Person C changes the correspondence of the mutual behavior control relationship between A and B. (It is not meaningful in these last cases to describe C’s effects as concordant or discordant. His effect is tovary the concordance or discordance between, say, RC’, and ,FC’s or to vary the correspondence or noncorrespondence between, say ,BC’; and ;BC’,.) In summary, A and B may have a common interest in C’s taking a particular action for either or both of two reasons: (a) It increases both their outcomes and (b) it places them in a situation of high correspondence in which both are able to attain their high outcomes at the same time. The first is true when C’s two actions affect their rewards and costs in the same way, cFC , being concordant with CFC 3; for example, the adult chaperone may by her presence disrupt the young couple’s uninhibited and rewarding love making. The second is true when C is able to determine (a) the degree to which A’s and B’s RCs and FCs are concordant (e.g., the fond parents of a young bride provide her and her husband with household equipment that makes it easier for them to do the chores they expect of each other, thus reducing RC discordant with FC) or (b) the degree to which A’s and B’s BCs are correspondent [e.g., the friend who (c») provides piano accompaniment to the pair of violinists, one of whom must otherwise (c;) do the unrewarding job of providing the accompaniment while the other enjoys playing the violin ]. Facilitating the A-B Relationship By his effect on the correspondence between A’s and B’s outcomes C can strengthen or weaken their relationship. Further aspects of this phenomenon are examined in Chapter 10’s discussion of coalitions. Meantime we shall look at some rather specific ways in which he can promote or facilitate their relationship. The Circular Relationship. Person B may be unilaterally dependent on A, affected by ,FC, or ,BC, but without any power over A. Person C can transform this into a relationship of mutual dependence if he is able to exercise some form of control over A, either CFC, or -BC,4. We might wonder why C would do this on B’s behalf, but one clear case would be when B has similar control over him, either ,FC¢ or ;BCc. Thus in one simple case C makes possible a circular pattern of fate control; he is willing to help A if A will then help B because B will then help him. An example is provided by three roommates with different needs and skills. Albert, the astronomy student, can help Bob with his calculus problems while Bob, son of a garage mechanic, can repair the clutch in Carl’s BMW if Carl, a major in Romance languages, will tutor Albert for his French exam. The circular nature of the pattern is indicated by the subscripts of the three terms: ,FCs, gFCc, and CFC ,. It can be seen that C does more than simply facilitate the A-B relationship. He actually makes it possible. A and B have a common interest in having C enact c,. A’s interest is direct—he profits directly fromc,. B’s interest is indirect—he wants C to enactc , because A does and he wants to please A. Furthermore, A andB have means of satisfying their interests; A by inducing B to benefit C and thereby to induce C to benefit A, and B, by inducing C to benefit A so that A will benefit B. In this situation any reciprocated FC (e.g., CFC, as a reciprocation for p°C) would render superfluous the other two FCs (in the example ,FC, and (FC,). The two persons with mutual fate control could do as well without the third person as with him; therefore his inclusion would be in doubt. In general, we might expect that arranging the exchange of benefits between two persons would be simpler than managing the circular ‘pass it on’’ pattern with the three persons and would therefore tend to be preferred. A circular pattern of dependence may also be based on BC; for example, the operative controls would be ,BC3, sBCc, and -BC 4. Here each term might imply that the second person (the one ‘‘controlled’’”) would get satisfaction from comparing his own behavior with that of the first person (the one exercising the control). Without C, A has no reason to remainina relationship with B, but ifC is oriented toward comparison withB and A is oriented toward comparison with C then a three-way relationship is possible. In each case the satisfaction may come from similarity (matching the comparison person) or from dissimilarity (mismatching). Not all combinations of these preferences, however, are equally good for the trio. It is fairly easy to show that for maximal correspondence among the three persons’ outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 case (for all three to be able to gain reward at the same time), either all three must prefer matching their comparison persons or one must prefer matching and the other two, mismatching. The proof of this statement is found in the simple demonstration that with only two responses each there is no pattern of their three choices that will fulfill the requirements of either two matches and one mismatch or three mismatches. We analyze this phenomenon in greater detail when we consider the relation between outcome correspondence and cognitive balance. Improving the Reward-Cost Balance. Consider the case in which the A-B relationship is of marginal benefit to its participants because their costs in delivering rewards to each other are almost as great as the value of those rewards (e.g., RC, is discordant with ,FC, and almost equal in magnitude). C can increase the profitability of the interaction if (a) he is rewarded by the same actions by which A andB reward each other, (b) A’s and B’s costs are increased very little in the triad, and (c) C has means of rewarding them. This is best exemplified by informative or entertaining actions that lose little of their value by being performed for the benefit of more than one person and the costs of which increase little with small increment in the number of recipients. A’s costs are reduced by the addition of the third person, at least in relation to the rewards he delivers. In general, if the rewards are such (shareable and mutually enjoyable) that the total reward value of A’s action increases more with the addition of the third person than his costs do and if the same is true for B, thenaC who is able to reciprocate the rewards will make possible a triad that is more satisfying to all than any dyad would be. Thibaut and Kelley provide other illustrations of this and related functions of the third person (1959, pp. 196-197). The Middle Man. Someaspects of the preceding cases are involved in the third person who, in the interests of reward-cost improvement, is the middle man in certain aspects of the A-B exchange. Consider the lonely woman (A) who wishes to employ an escort (B) for occasional social events. For reasons given in the Chapter 3 discussion of the incompatibility of such rewards as money and affectionate attention it may be mutually interfering (cost raising and reward reducing) for her to give money directly to the escort. A third person, the agent for an escort service, can intervene to pass the money along from the employer to the escort (while taking a small commission). This serves to conceal the economic aspect of the A-B interaction and, by permitting them to limit their direct exchanges to social-emotional resources, to maintain the reward value of these resources at a high level. A middle man may also handle the exchange between A and B of all the relevant resources. This usually occurs for reasons of cost cutting. IfA and B find it too costly to transmit rewards to each other but, for some reason, economical to transmit them to C, and if they are the kinds of reward that can be passed along, then C may make possible an indirect exchange where no direct one is possible. The examples in economic relations (wholesaler, retail distributor) are commonplace. In informal social relations a symmetrical version of Longfellow’s story about Miles Standish and Priscilla Mullens, with John Alden as the middle man, would serve as an illustration. Facilitating Turn Taking. In the turn-taking game, if A and B persist in pursuing their immediate interests, neither gains anything. A third person can sometimes modify the problem by pointing out the wisdom of turn taking, perhaps supporting the argument with reference to the values of max joint and min diff. The effect is to induce a shift in the A-B relationship from a2 X 2 pattern of high conflict to an extended pattern of sequential play in which, with the value transformations, A and B have high correspondence of outcomes. An experimental example is provided by Deutsch’s research (1966) on tutored communication in the trucking game. Disrupting the A-B Relationship Inducements to Discordant Behavior. C may have more fate control over B than A. If so, and if he so desires, C can induce B to take actions that are discordant in the A-B matrix. C’s interest in doing this would reflect some divergence between his own preferences about B’s behavior and A’s preferences (e.g., gFCc is discordant with gFC,). For example, a daughter has been pursuing her school work (which her mother wants) and her mother has been providing additions to the girl’s wardrobe. A young man whose “hold” over the girl is greater than that of the mother may make his presence contingent ona different activity, one he finds rewarding but that the mother does not. This is illustrated in Figure 9.11 where the cells to which the young man (C) restrains the interaction (by his contingency rule) are heavily outlined. The matrix analysis suggests that the young man does not increase the noncorrespondence between mother and daughter over the entire 2 x 2 xX 2 relationship, but he does create a sharp conflict between them in the portion to which he limits the interaction in converting his fate control to behavior control. Invoking Antisocial Values. If two boys are in a Chicken situation (e.g., armed and surely able to hurt each other if they fight), a third person can Young man absent Present Figure 9.11 Person C creates conflict between A and B by converting his FC; to BC. sometimes strengthen the hand of one against the other; for example, if a close friend of A makes it clear that he will disdain A if he backs away from the danger, B knows that A now has strong RC operating on him to take the risky action. The friend’s presence and comment increases the plausibility that A will pursue the dangerous course. This, of course, makes a similar course more dangerous for B and indirectly increases A’s chances to come out the winner. Because of the advantage C’s action gives him, A may be tempted to create the same situation himself by making statements to his friend which imply that he (A) is to be considered a coward if he does not follow through with his aggressive intentions. The problem in either case is that the evocation of the value of bravery may be effective for B as well, acting to make the risky course more desirable than the safe one, regardless of its outcome. Indeed, a third person’s general labeling of the challenge situation in such value terms may push the pair into a mutually destructive (though, in terms of transformed RC, mutually rewarding) course. Asymmetrical Invocation of Prosocial Norms. Inathreat game C may invoke a loyalty norm for the threatener. This increases his reluctance to use his threat power (increases the RC against taking the mutually destructive action) and renders him more susceptible to the allocator’s exploitation. Thus, although invoking the prosocial norms relevant to both the allocator and the threatener (fairness as well as loyalty) may work to the long-term advantage of the pair (by helping them to avoid a costly series of disruptions in the interests of justice), the asymmetrical invocation of loyalty may set the stage for exploitation and eventual disruptive rebellion. THE DYAD’S POWER OVER C Analysis of C’s Outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship Figure 9.12 describes the outcomes forC, one of three young men sharing an apartment. His outcomes are shown as they are affected on a typical evening by his own actions (whether he sings or reads) and the actions of his two roommates (whether A sings or reads and whether B plays the piano or reads). The format is similar to that in Figure 9.3 except that the only outcomes in the matrix are those of C. The sources of variance in C’s outcomes for this situation are analyzed in Figure 9.13. This analysis suggests the main reasons underlying the distribution of C’s outcomes. It Figure 9.12 Person C’s outcomes as affected by his own actions and by those of A andB. makes little difference to him, on the average, whether he sings or reads (RC¢ is small). He has some slight preference for A to read rather than sing and a somewhat stronger preference for B to play the piano rather than read (4FCc and gFCc¢ terms). The most important component of his interests is that he prefers to sing when A does and not to sing when A does not (to read when A reads). This is the ,BC- component. He has a very slight preference not to sing when B plays the piano and to sing when B reads (sBC-). He has a moderately strong preference for A and B to act in a “similar’’ manner, that is, both to make music or both to read (,sFC-), and this preference is particularly strong when he himself is singing (i.e., when he is reading he would prefer that one of the others be making music). The latter is indicated by 4sBCc. A and B’s Controls over C C’s preferences mean, of course, that A andB have certain kinds of control over him. Our example indicates all the possible kinds of control. Individually, A and B have FC and BC which can be used cumulatively. Thus in our example A and B can vary C’s outcomes over a 5-unit range by coordinated use of their FCs, moving froma,b,toa,b ,. Similarly, they can combine their respective BCs to exercise a 7-unit degree of BC over C, although most of the effect here is A’s. This process also requires that A and B coordinate on the a, b, versus a,b, combinations of their actions. (The former motivates C to doc, for 7 points or take 0 points with cz, and so on.) These examples point to an important fact: the cumulative use of their individual controls over C, either FC or BC, requires A and B to coordinate their actions. To combine their respective controls they must limit themselves to two of the four possible combinations of their actions. Jointly, A and B also have FC and BC over C. As shown in Figure 9.13, however, these are exercised by varying whether they “match” their actions; that is, by which of the two diagonal pairs of combinations of 2 Xx 2 x 2 pattern Components Component weights RCc aFCc pBFCc AaBCc pBCc apFCc a8e) asBCc Figure 9.13 Analysis of C’s outcomes in the 2x22 pattern from Figure 9.12. their actions their choices represent. Thus in the example A and B can use their joint fate control to give C 3 units simply by doing behaviors with matching subscripts. Similarly, via ,,BCc, their matching behaviors motivate C to do c, and their mismatched behaviors motivate him to do Cy. The cumulative and joint components of A’s and B’s control over C can be contrasted in the following ways: 1. In the cumulative use of their separate powers A and B must coordinate between two specific combinations of their actions if they are to have maximum effect. Failure of such coordination, however, does not preclude one having some effect. 2. In the use of their joint power, A and B must coordinate between two specific pairs of combinations of their actions (the pairs defined by the two diagonals). Either member of a certain pair will have the desired effect. Failure of such coordination totally precludes having the desired effect. In short, in (1) the coordination requirements are more severe but may be partly fulfilled, whereas in (2) the coordination requirements are less severe but are absolute. One common kind of power combines the worst properties of cumulative and joint power. Referred to by Thibaut and Kelley (1959) as conjunctive power, it is illustrated in Figure 9.14. A and B deliver a reward to C only if they coordinate on 4,b,. Thus the coordination requirement is both severe and absolute. The analysis of the components reveals the reason. Although each person’s contribution to the requirement is rewarding to C (4FCc and ,FC¢), each partial contribution is negative for him in the absence of the other part (,4,FC -). The mirror image of conjunctive power is disjunctive power in which C is rewarded, unless, say, the single a,b, combination occurs. Here the best aspects of cumulative and joint power are combined: the coordination requirements are mild and the effect is maximal with their fulfillment. The analysis of this pattern (in Figure 9.15) shows that the joint power of A and B (43FCc) compensates for any partial failures to coordinate optimally in the cumulative use of their separate powers. The analysis of C’s outcomes reveals the means that A and B have of controlling them, and potentially, of controlling C’s behavior. In the preceding section we discussed the reasons that A and B may have for wishing to control C’s actions, and in this section we cover the resources they have for doing so. We now take up the three sets of outcomes simultaneously and consider some phenomena unique to the triad. Later we return to the interaction between A and B on the one hand and C on —12 Figure 9.14 A and B’s conjunctive power over C and its components. a fit ABFCc Figure 9.15 A and B’s disjunctive power over C and its components. the other, as we analyze a possible coalition against C or his coalition with one of them against the other. TRIADS BASED ON COMPOUNDED DYADIC RELATIONS Because a triad includes three dyads, one possible special form of triadic interdependence is that in which a certain two-person game is played simultaneously and in synchrony in each of the three pairings. Thus, if A and B are ina PD game, each also, separately but simultaneously, plays the same PD game with C; the single constraint is that the choice a person makes in one relationship is also the choice he makes in the other. Following Hamburger (1973), we describe as a compound game one in which each person of the triad plays “several 2-person games simultaneously” (p. 33) and ‘is required to make the same choice in each of these . 2-person games he is playing” (p. 38). The first limits us to relationships based on components found in the dyad (e.g., 4FCc¢, gBC 4, and RC¢, but not g-FC 4 or 4cFC) and the second property permits us to characterize the relationship in a 2 X 2 Xx 2 matrix. From the point of view of the A-B relationship, compounding has the consequences that (a) the relationship between A and B atc ,andc,may be different from the relationship that is compounded and (b) their relationship at c, may be different from that at c,. The implications of these facts are that A and B must treat their relationship in a different way when it is part of the three-way interaction and further, when (b) is true, that the nature of their relationship may depend on what action C takes. Let us begin with examples of the first phenomenon. We asserted in Chapter 5 that in the optimal dyadic PDG the amount a person benefits the partner by the C choice is about twice as big as the self-benefit he forgoes by doing so. Therefore for a proper compounding of PDG it is necessary to have the person’s RC equal to half the total benefit he delivers to his partners. A 2 Xx 2 X 2 relationship based on this idea is shown in Figure 9.16. A’s and B’s outcomes are shown in the upper portion of the table and C’s, in corresponding locations in the lower portion. The outcomes reflect the facts that each C response yields each partner one unit of reward, or a total of two units, and that each D response gives the actor one unit of reward. That this is a proper triadic PDG relationship is shown by the fact that the more persons choosing C, the higher the total score, A's and B's outcomes Gis outcomes Figure 9.16 Compound PDG. but, whatever the other persons’ choices are, an individual always gets a higher score by choosing D than C. The reasons are apparent: 1. By his choice of C a person puts more into the system than by a choice of D. 2. As far as his own interests go, a person is always better off to give himself the smaller benefit than to generate the larger one for his partners. It will be noted in Figure 9.16 that, whatever C’s choice, the relationship between A and B is a constant-sum game. They divide up two units (if C withholds his benefits) or four units (if he delivers them). Thus the three-way PDG is not reflected in a PDG between each pair of persons when the third person’s choice is held constant. The constant-sum property of the A-B relationship reflects the fact that, for example, —RC , is equal to ,FC,. If each person’s RC is made smaller than half the total FC he controls, the A-B relationship is a PDG, whether C chooses his cooperative or his competitive response. Correspondent MBC provides another example in which the A-B relationships atc, and c, differ from the dyadic pattern compounded. Figure 9.17 shows a compounding of correspondent MBC. Each person receives A's and B's outcomes C's outcomes by by a Figure 9.17 Compound correspondent MBC. a reward from each of his partners whose response he manages to match. In the case shown each person gets two units of reward if the trio enacts a,b ,C, OF AybyC». In all other cells two persons get one reward each and the third, no reward. The last is the person who has failed to coordinate. The two fortunate ones get their rewards from matching each other. The “deviate” who fails to match his partners deprives them of a unit of reward and gets nothing himself. It can be seen in Figure 9.17 thatif A and B know whatC has done before making their choices they have RC for their own choices. The A-B relationship is the same at c, and c, but the rows and columns are interchanged; that is, the RCs are reversed in direction. In general, once one person acts in this situation the others find it their best bet to coordinate with him. Such coordination benefits everyone, the first person included, and the relationship encourages the emergence of someone who takes the initiative and thereby “directs’’ the others in achieving the mutually beneficial coordination. The second phenomenon, that the c,; and c. matrices may differ with compounding, was first noted by Hamburger (1973). This is the more interesting possibility because it implies that if A and/or B can determine what C’s choice will be, their strategy for making their decision(s) may differ, depending on what he does. Our analysis reveals that this phenomenon occurs only when the compounded game involves BC in combination with FC and /or RC. This is shown by a consideration of the following: 1. Only components from dyadic relationships can be included in the compounding, by definition of the term. 2. The formulas in Figure 9.5 show that the only differences in patterning between thec ,;andc, matrices produced by a dyadic C-control term are those produced by -BC, and -BCg. The RC¢ term is irrelevant and the cFC, and FC, terms change only the average level betweenc,andc, and not the pattern. 3. BC, and -BCgalone (applied symmetrically, as they must be in compounding) act, in effect, to reverse the labeling between the c,and c, matrices. This was apparent in Figure 9.17 in which the c, matrix is simply the c , matrix with the subscripts interchanged for each person’s responses. 4. Given -BC, and -BC;,, if the compound game also involves FC and/or RC components, the reversal of the RC terms between c, and c, produces a change in pattern rather than a mere reversal of labels. This results from the change in concordance between the RC terms and the BC and FC terms of the submatrices. Some examples that illustrate this phenomenon are shown in Figure 9.18 which presents compound Chicken (MFC and MBC) and compound Hero (BRC and MBC). It can be seen that with the compounding of Chicken the A-8 relationship shifts from some combination of PDG and Battle of the Sexes atc, to a rather cooperative game similar to MDG at c». For the compounding of Hero the shift is from a simple coordination game atc, to Martyr at Cc». TYPES OF CONSTANT-SUM GAME IN THE TRIAD The relationship of perfect conflict in the dyad entails a conflict between the actor’s interests and those of his partner. In the one case (NCR MBC) the two persons prefer different combinations of behavior. In the other (BRC equal to and discordant with MFC) there is a perfect conflict between giving reward to the partner and keeping it for oneself. These two kinds of constant-sum game have their parallels in the triad and it may alsoinvolvea third type of conflict. Figure 9.19 showsa constant-sum game based on noncorrespondent MBC. In this particular example one person in each pair gains a reward for matching the second and the second gains 22, Compound Chicken Figure 9.18. A’s and B’s outcomes for compound Chicken and Hero. a reward for not matching the first. Thus A tries to match B but B tries not to match A, A tries not to match C but C tries to match A, and B tries to match C but C tries not to match B. The resulting pattern is a game in which the three persons divide three units of reward, according toa1:1:1 or2:1:0 ratio. The first occurs with a set of responses that lets each person satisfy one of his two requirements (e.g., a,b,c ,) and the second occurs when one person is able to satisfy both of his requirements (e.g., a1b,C2. makes A the lucky fellow). Here as with compound CR MBC, if A and B know what C has done, they have RC. However, when they have this information and act accordingly, C gets no reward (as in a,b,c ,); therefore no one will want to make a first choice that can be known by the others. Is there a basis here for two persons to act together, either to gain good outcomes for themselves at the expense of the third or to ensure an equal distribution of rewards among the three? With regard to the first possibility, it may be noted that when A gets two rewards C gets one, but when C gets two rewards it is B who gets one and not A (who gets one when B gets two). (The particular pair-relations here depend on the one of two ways in which the NCR MBCsare fitted together.) Thus there is no basis for a two-person exchange agreement that freezes out the third. In relation to a dyad’s ensuring the 1:1:1 distribution it can be seen that any Figure 9.19 Constant-sum game based on noncorrespondent MBC. pair can make it at least as desirable for the third person to cooperate in such a distribution as not to. If A and B enact a,b,, C gains as much by enacting c , (which yields 1:1:1) as by enacting c, (which yields 2:0:1). Of course, if for some reason he believes he can do better than one reward per occasion, C may attempt to disrupt the A-B coalition by favoring A.A and B might guard against a cumulative effect of this sort by alternatively setting up for a,b,c, and a,b,c, were it not for the fact that in both cases C’s failure to do his part for equality results in A’s advantage. Thus it is clear that A and B are stymied, even as between forcing C to cooperate in an equal division or freezing him out with alternating 2:1 rewards for themselves. The triadic version of the constant-sum game in which RCs and FCs are equal in magnitude but discordant is shown in Figure 9.20. In creating this type of pattern, it is necessary to set each person’s RC equal in magnitude to thesum of the effects he has on his partners. Thus A’s choice is betweena , which benefits each of his partners by one unit anda, which benefits himself two units. His conflict, then, is between retaining all the benefit for himself or distributing it equally between his partners. (Is it possible for the person to face a three-way conflict between benefiting himself or one particular partner or the other? The answer is no if we limit each person to two responses. Obviously, three responses are by by Figure 9.20 Constant-sum game based on FC-RC discordance. needed in this case. This is one of several points at which moving from the dyad to the triad without a corresponding increase in number of responses creates peculiar constraints.) Is it possible, in the constant-sum game in Figure 9.20, for A and B to freeze out C or to impose an equal distribution of the rewards? The answer to the first is no. They have no way of preventing C from having at least his share of the available rewards. The second problem is trivial for the same reason, that each person can be assured at least an equal share, simply by following his RC in the resultant matrix (which results in everyone keeping his two units at a,b,c,). A third kind of triadic constant-sum game is based strictly on FC components— 4FC 3, 4FCc, BFC 4, BFCc, CFC 4, and CFC ,. If each person’s FCs are discordant, the result is the relationship shown in Figure 9.21. Each person has a choice of partner to benefit. Thus three units of benefit are available for distribution, except that a person may not receive the one for which he himself is responsible. It is obvious that this type of constant-sum game is unique to the triad in relation to the dyad. In the dyad, conflict of interest can occur only between the person and his partner. In the triad, as in this case, there is also a possible conflict between the two partners, reflected in the person’s uncertainty about which one to help and in their competition for his assistance. Figure 9.21 Constant-sum game based on discordant FC’s. It can be seen in Figure 9.21 that by benefiting each other (e.g., A andB exchange a, and b,) any pair can freeze out the third. The excluded person’s only leverage is to distribute his benefit unevenly between the two and thereby attempt to induce the disadvantaged person to reciprocate as the price for receiving help. Associated with a dyad’s ability to freeze out the third person is their power to impose a 1:1:1 division. Thus A andB can force C to accept such a division as the price for including him at all. OUTCOME CORRESPONDENCE AND COGNITIVE BALANCE IN THE TRIAD One meaning of certain kinds of interdependence is that a given person’s rewards depend on the matching of behavior between two persons. Thus in ,BC, B’s outcomes depend on the matches made between his and A’s actions. If the sign of the BC term is positive, he will get a reward if the actions are matched (@,), or ab.) or, if the sign is negative, he will get a reward if they are not matched (@,b, or a,b.). Similarly, in ,cFC;, if the term is positive, B will get a reward if A’s and C’s actions match, but if it is negative B will get a reward if they do not match. One prime example to which the notion of matching or not matching applies is that of opinion expression. In certain contexts a person finds it rewarding to express the same opinion as another person—to match opinions with him, so to speak. In other contexts a person finds it rewarding to express disagreement with another. Viewing matching and not matching in this light, the question which sets of personal preferences regarding agreement and disagreement can be satisfied within the triad naturally arises. Is it possible for all three persons to satisfy such preferences at the same time? If so, for what sets of preferences is this possible? In other words, what preferences are compatible in the sense of generating an outcome matrix of high correspondence? It will be clear that in the dyad only two sets of matching preferences generate correspondence: either both A and B must prefer agreement or both must prefer disagreement. A cannot satisfy his preference for matching at the same time that B satisfies his for not matching. Such preferences underlie noncorrespondent MBC. It is readily shown that in the triad only two patterns of preferences can generate correspondence: either matching must be preferred in all three dyads or it must be preferred in one dyad but not in the other two. This is true, whether the matching refers (a) to BC terms (between the person and one of his partners), (b) to joint-FC terms (between the two partners of the person), or (c) to both. The proof of this statement is found in the possible patterns of actions in the 2 x 2 x 2 matrix. Two patterns, a,b,c, and a,c», yield matching in each pair of persons. These patterns clearly make it possible for each person to satisfy preferences for agreement with each of his partners (the BC terms) and a preference for agreement between his partners (the joint-FC term). The remaining six possible patterns constitute three pairs of mirror-image patterns (e.g., a,b,c. and ayb.Cc,), each of which yields matching in one pair of persons but not-matching in the other two pairs; for example, a,b,c, and ayb,c, yield matching between A and B but not-matching between A and C and between B and C. These patterns make it possible for one person (C in the example) to satisfy (1) his preferences for disagreement with each other person and (2) his preference for agreement between the two others, and for each of the other persons (A andB in the example) to satisfy (1) their respective preferences for agreement with one another and for disagreement with the first person and (2) their respective preferences for disagreement between the two others. In each case the first preferences correspond to the BC terms and the second preferences, to the joint-FC terms. The reverse side of the coin is that no response pattern permits two persons to satisfy their preferences for matching and, at the same time, the third person to satisfy his preference for not matching. Similarly, no response pattern permits three persons, each of whom prefers not matching, to be satisfied simultaneously. We observe here a close equivalence between the conditions necessary for correspondence of outcomes and the requirements of cognitive balance (Heider, 1958). The sets of preferences that make possible correspondence of outcomes are also those that are in balance. At the dyadic level each person must want the same relation to exist between the two, either match or not-match. This corresponds to the balance rule for dyads that two positive or two negative relations are in balance. At the triadic level each person’s preferences regarding his relations with each of the others must be consistent in a balance sense with his preference about the relation between them. If he wants to match each of them, he must also want them to match each other (the rule for the triad that three positive relations are in balance). On the other hand, if he wants not to match either of them, he must want them to match each other, or, if he wants to match one but not the other, he must want them not to match each other (the rule for the triad that one positive and two negative relations are in balance). This equivalence between outcome correspondence and cognitive balance is provocative of speculation. At a descriptive level it means that the correspondent patterns are those that also permit each person to attain cognitive balance. Absence of interpersonal conflict is concurrent with lack of the intrapersonal tension associated with imbalance. Thus the three persons are not only not in conflict among themselves about which set of outcomes to attain, as they would be with noncorrespondent outcomes, but each of them is able to have a balanced view of the triad (and veridically so). Of course, the lack of conflict about outcomes need not mean a lack of opinion conflict. One of the correspondent (and balanced) patterns is that in which two persons agree with each other and disagree with the third. However, the correspondence means that even in this pattern the “need” of each for a consistent set of relations—his need for balance—is satisfied. At a causal and more speculative level one wonders whether outcome correspondence may not constitute one of the antecedents of the preference for balanced interpersonal relations. If such relations are characterized by low conflict (at least in terms of outcomes), they may become intuitively recognized as such and subjectively valued. In the light of this analysis the individual’s desire for triadic balance may reflect a sense of the interpersonal compatability of certain sets of preferences for matching and not-matching. We must hasten to add an important caveat to these observations. The argument above applies only to the 2 x 2 and2 x2 x2 interdependence patterns. With more alternative behaviors, there are many ways for persons not to match and it obviously becomes possible for all three persons to satisfy their respective desires simultaneously not to match each other. In other words, the equivalence between outcome correspondence and cognitive balance obtains only in a polarized, twovalued world; for example, when every action is either pro or con with respect to some central social issue. How frequently and extensively the real world has this property we leave for the reader to judge.

