Negotiation and Coalition Formation A Model of Independent and Joint Action in the Dyad, 282 Identifying the IA and Th Pairs, 284 Classification of Possible Outcomes, 285 Reconsideration of the Th Pair, 288 Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship, 289 Negotiation, 292 The Comparison Level for Alternatives as a Bargaining Position ,296 Some Qualifications, 299 A Model of Action in the Triad: Coalition Formation, 301 Identifying the IA, Th, CoA, and CoTh Triplets, 302 Classification of Triplets on the Frontier, 306 Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship, 307 Triad Action without Coalition, 308 Triad Action with Coalition ,309 ram H's ay a iwe wAdg Rd : be VM Ae reek pee feet pi oc oe e : vw row, vise a a ite a8) So ‘vel, tr A ie ee i Sete ry i bas soistogey ae ca cs She Be fe a see BR “ff outed fi i ae olts frE€ p? ONE ON Mal Be heahnvoptetle ui nr Th 09 Al PRs es preg hae wl mm 0 eu ay: ess se Pa te a —- en Le Ae ae va er Sls nldenag9 4 ies ie con a yd a54, ot om entietein re GC ikigl rr Py Fe p /omapr wus ges A ‘ en ‘ini tits : YW ABSTRACT This chapter first presents a model of independent and joint action in the dyad that identifies the framework within which negotiation between the members can occur. This framework consists of the various bargaining positions that may be available to the two persons and the settlement points that are viable in relation to the bargaining positions. A distinction is made between two types of bargaining position: (a) those created by each person simply pursuing his own interests and (b) those created explicitly, as threats, for the purpose of imposing on the other person a settlement favorable to the bargainer. The model is then extended to the triad where it forms the basis for an analysis of coalition formation—an analysis of which pair of the three persons, if any, will act in concert against the third. The basis for coalition formation exists in the mutual benefits to the coalition members of working together to create bargaining positions of the two types noted. The possibilities of coalition action are shown to increase the number of possible process and outcome patterns in the triad as compared with the dyad. This chapter describes a model of action in the dyad and then generalizes the model to the triad. The latter enables us to examine the conditions underlying the formation of coalitions within the triad and the negotiations involved in the formation process. Here we do more systematically what we have done impressionistically throughout this book; that is, speculate about the end state of interaction in various interdependence relations (what the dyad or triad finally agrees, tacitly or explicitly, to do) and how they reach that end state (by threat, going their separate ways, negotiation, and so on). We have considered interaction process at various other places in this book from a variety of perspectives. In the analysis of transformations we dealt with the evocation of outcome transformations, the transposition effects of preemption, and turn-taking sequential transformations. In Chapter 8 we dealt with the information processes by which interdependent persons make inferences about the given matrix and about how each other is transforming it. In this final chapter we adopt still another perspective on interaction process. We begin with the transformed or effective matrix and assume that the persons have good information about it. In other words, the problems of inferring the given matrix and the transformations have been solved. Each person knows what the effective values are for both persons in each possible outcome of their relationship. In the most interesting cases to be considered there still remains some degree of outcome noncorrespondence, and consequently there is room for further prosocial transformations of the matrix. In these cases the interaction includes appeals for further correspondence-heightening transformation. The values and rules that are sometimes elicited before interaction and that cause a person to treat the relationship as more correspondent than it is given are appealed to here as ways of settling the remaining conflict of interest. These prominently include proposals for sequential turn taking and pleas for justice (some variant of the min diff criterion). The conflictual aspects of the effective matrix also stimulate the use of egoistic criteria in devising means of settling the issues in favor of one’s self. Chief among these is the max rel criterion as a means of identifying an effective threat action to use against one’s partner. In addition to assuming that the participants have good information about the effective form of their interdependence, we assume that they have good control over the moment-to-moment temporal course of their interaction. Preemption is ruled out by assuming high alertness and equal motility of action. Neither person can plan on catching the other off guard in an undefended position. If one chooses to exercise his best threat action, the other one is assumed to be able to exercise his best defense or counteraction against it. The above assumptions are, of course, unrealistic. Attribution about given values and transformations often occurs during negotiation and not before it. The transformation process is rarely complete before negotiation begins, and bargaining appeals and proposals are not simply routes to settlement but have an impact on the effective matrix itself. Alertness and motility are rarely equal between two persons; therefore one may act (or attempt to act) without the other being prepared. For a more realistic view of interaction process in all its complexity the reader will have to assemble the implications of our various analyses as they bear on a given pattern of interdependence, much as we have done, informally, in describing probable scenarios for various matrices. A MODEL OF INDEPENDENT AND JOINT ACTION IN THE DYAD Before considering coalitions in the triad it is necessary to specify the conditions for independent or joint action in the dyad. The essential elements of coalition formation are present in the dyad when the pair of persons agree to work together ‘against the game,” so to speak. In the pursuit of their best outcomes the members of a dyad may act in one of three ways: 1. Independent action, in which each person acts on his own, perhaps taking account of what his partner (acting in the same manner) is likely to do, to get the best outcomes he can. 2. Cooperative joint action, in which the two persons act in an agreed-on, coordinated manner, in the interest of providing each one with better outcomes than are available by individual action. (Value transformations serve the important purpose of facilitating such agreements, obviating the need for extensive analysis and negotation. Thus the agreement may be tacit rather than explicit.) 3. Imposed joint action, in which the two persons act in an agreed-on, coordinated manner in the interest of preventing one of them from creating poorer outcomes for both, although particularly for the partner. The agreement here is imposed by the one person’s wielding his threat power and consequently is usually explicit. Which type of action occurs in the dyad (which is analogous to the question of which coalition, if any, will occur in the triad) depends upon the pairs of outcomes in the matrix and the way they are controlled by the two persons. For any given matrix, it is possible informally to anticipate how the interaction is likely to go and its probable conclusion. We now present a more systematic way of stating these expectations. This model is not presented as descriptive of behavior in the dyad. Nor is it a prescription of how the pair ought to behave. Rather, it is analytical of the possibilities, requirements, and constraints inherent to the interdependence matrix and suggestive of a scenario of the interaction that each person would find plausible. Thatis to say, the scenario takes account of the possible bases for action that the matrix provides for the pair and that they may present to each other. In short, this is a logical, coherent statement of the bases for action in interdependence relationships. Our model entails a three-step analysis in which (a) two pivotal pairs of outcomes in the relationship are identified, (b) the remaining pairs of outcomes likely to come under consideration are classified in relation to the two crucial pairs, (c) each person’s preferences for the pairs in (b) are examined to predict the probable outcome of the relationship; for example, whether it will result in independent action, cooperative joint action, or imposed joint action. By referring the predictions in (c) back to the matrix, it can be determined what specific form the action will take. Identifying the IA and Th Pairs Our model assumes that decisions are made in relation to two critical pairs of outcomes in the matrix, the independent action pair (IA) and the threat pair (Th). It is these two pairs that (in some instances) afford bargaining positions for the two persons and that (in all instances) give relationship-specific psychological meaning to their actions. IA Pair. This is the pair of outcomes that A and B will get through their best “independent” actions as each one tries to maximize his own outcomes (follows amax own criterion). Each is assumed to follow his own RC or, lacking strong (dominant) RC, to take account of the other person’s likely action (per the other person’s RC) and to act accordingly (per own BC). In the absence of these conditions one or both are uncertain what the outcomes will be, so the pair of values is calculated on the basis of uncoordinated random action; for example, if there is uncertainty for both persons, as with pure MBC ina 2 X 2 matrix, the pair of values is simply GM, and GMg. In a larger matrix, if there is some section of the matrix through which the “If 1. ., then he. . .” reasoning cycles (i.e., there is no ‘‘saddlepoint’’), then IA is calculated by averaging each person’s outcomes over that section of the matrix. In brief, the IA pair defines what each person can gain from the relationship if he goes his independent way, merely taking account of what the other is likely to do in his independent action. ThPair. The threat pair of values results from each person’s best attempt unilaterally to establish a threat position from which to make demands for the good outcomes available in the relationship. As in the case of IA, the point is established by a person only in the face of his partner’s similar efforts. Thus the Th pair represents both the best threat for A and his best defense against B’s effort to establish a threat position. The type of pair that can best serve A’s purposes as.a basis for threat depends on the particular distribution of the good outcomes or the ‘frontier’ points. In general, however, it is a pair of points in which the difference (A-B) is maximized. [The term (A-B) refers to B’s outcome subtracted from A’s.] Generally, the Th pair of a matrix can be identified by examining the matrix of (A-B) values (cf. Figure 5.6) and then assuming that A will do his best unilaterally to maximize this value while B will do his best to minimize it, that is, to maximize (B—A). Each is assumed to take account of the other’s efforts and to do the best he can in the light of what the other can be expected to do. (Our assumptions here amount to treating the pair as playing a constant-sum game. The Th pair is equivalent to the equilibrium pair of values, defined in one of the ways summarized in the discussion of Figure 6.14.) We consider below the exceptions to the max rel rule as a basis for identifying the best Th pair, but meantime the reader will appreciate the general usefulness of the rule. To consider the matter from A’s point of view the ideal Th pair is one in which (A-B) is large and positive. This enables A to threaten unilaterally to move the pair to a point in the relationship at which, even though his own outcome will be low, B’s will be much lower. The value of such threat, of course, is to exert pressure on B to grant concessions to A in order to avoid the low outcomes. The Th pair may be the same as the IA pair. If so, it is regarded as nonexistent. (It would be meaningless for a person to threaten his partner with outcomes they can get by independent action.) By its definition the Th pair cannot yield either person higher outcomes than the IA pair. If any pair selected by the threat criterion were to yield higher outcomes for either person than the (tentatively defined) IA pair, the Th pair would become the IA pair. The point is that as A and B attempt to maximize the difference to their own respective advantages neither can attain higher outcomes than he attains when each attempts merely to maximize his own outcomes. However, one or both (usually both) may attain lower outcomes in the pursuit of max rel. Classification of Possible Outcomes All possible pairs of outcomes in the matrix can be classified with respect to the bargaining positions defined by the IA and Th pairs. By ‘‘all possible pairs” we refer not only to those specified in the matrix but also to others produced by trade offs between the cells of the matrix; for example, a particular 2 x 2 matrix may have only the following four pairs of outcomes: (0,0), (10,0), (0,0), and (0,10). By coordinated trade offs between the second and fourth pairs other pairs of outcomes are possible; for example, (5,5), (6,4), and (2,8). The classification of all possible pairs is shown in Figure 10.1. First, there may be Reward pairs in which both|persons have higher outcomes than in the IA pair. These are the ton that the dyad can obtain by cooperative joint action. The action required is joint because some type of agreement is necessary to attain the outcomes. (Remember, IA is the best they can do without such agreement.) The action may be considered cooperative because A and B must work together with the common purpose of giving each person more than he can get if he acts independently. If there are no Rew pairs, A and B can do no better by agreement than by independent action. Second, there may be B-complies (B-comp) pairs, in which B gets less than his outcome in IA but more than in Th, and A gets more than in IA. If there are such pairs, they include the outcomes to which A might hope to gain B’s compliance by using his threat over B (hence the label B-complies); that is, by threatening B to take the dyad to the Th pair A can put pressure on B to accept something less good for him than IA but better than Th (and, of course, better for A than [A—the basis of A’s interest in making the threat). The B-complies pairs can be attained only by agreement but it is an agreement imposed on B by A; hence these outcomes represent imposed joint action. B's outcomes Figure 10.1 Classification of pairs of outcomes in relation to the IA and Th pairs. Third, there may be A-complies (A-comp) pairs, defined for A in the same way as the B-complies pairs are defined for B, that is, better for A than Th but less good than IA and better for B than IA. B might hope to gain A’s acquiescence to one of these pairs. Finally, the remaining pairs may be dismissed from consideration as being not viable, that is, as having no basis for their bilateral acceptability. These pairs are either below the Th level for one person (why should he agree to accept less than the worst his partner can do to him?) or below IA for both persons (why should they agree to a set of outcomes that both can exceed at [A?). In fact, the notion of not viable pairs can be extended to include all pairs not on the frontier of the plot of pairs of outcomes. This is simply a way of precluding from consideration any pair of outcomes with respect to which another pair is better for both persons. In practice, this amounts to the assumption that the two persons have good information and use it carefully and skillfully. [With incomplete information, careless negotiation, and a complex bargaining task interdependent persons often fail to identify and agree on the frontier points (Kelley and Schenitzki, 1972; Pruitt and Lewis, 1975). | Thus in Figure 10.2 the nine large circles indicate the pairs of outcomes in a particular 3 x 3 relationship. As noted in Chapter 6, all possible trade offs among the cells in this relationship will yield pairs of outcomes that fall within the crosshatched convex polygon. B-—comp Yi Y Rew High Low B Figure 10.2 Classification of pairs of outcomes on the frontier. Among them we consider only those denoted by solid circles; that is, those on the frontier of the polygon; and it is only the frontier pairs that we classify as Rew, A-comp, B-comp, not viable, or (see below) IA. From the definition of the IA pair it will be noted that there may be no Rew pairs: the IA may be on the frontier itself, in which case it is given a special classification among the frontier points. Similarly, there may be no compliance pairs. The Th pair may equal IA, hence define no Comp pairs (and in that sense be nonexistent), or, evenif This different fromIA, there may be no outcomes on the frontier that satisfy the Comp criteria. If there are Comp pairs, the numbers of A-comp and B-comp pairs may differ greatly. If Th maximally favors A (his outcome there equals his outcome at IA), there will be no A-comp pairs and many B-comp pairs. The relative locations of the several kinds of pairs will make it clear why we use the term compliance to describe some of them. Because a compliance set does not include any of the elements of the IA or Rew sets, the person forced to take a Comp pair is in a sense acting in a nonvoluntary way, unwillingly submitting to the partner’s threat. He is required to accept lower outcomes than he might otherwise attain as through independent action or joint cooperative action. (In fact, the threatened person would be better off if no communication or agreement were possible! The IA is what two rational players might expect to get, on the average, with one-shot, no communication play.) The IA and the Th levels are somewhat similar in their psychological significance to the CL and CL, respectively. Thus the IA defines a level of outcomes the person might minimally expect from the interaction, and the Th defines a level he will be forced to take if the partner acts to disrupt the relationship. Consequently the compliance set outcomes are analogous to those obtained in a nonvoluntary relationship, being below CL but above CL,), (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). (The IA and Th pairs are discussed in relation to the CL, on p. 296.) Reconsideration of the Th pair We have already noted that although identifying the Th pair by the max rel rule is generally appropriate there are exceptions. The max rel criterion always yields the pair that gives the bargainer the most favorable position from which to make an equity claim. Thus the larger the value (B—A) fora particular pair of outcomes, the more favorable to B the frontier pair that comes closest to yielding him and A equal increments above that pair. The location of the Th pair, however, not only affects the location of an equitable outcome but also extends or curtails the two compliance sets. This effect of the threat pair is dependent not only on the value of (B-A) but also on the value of (B +A). Sometimes the effect is large enough thata point less favorable on the (B—A) criterion will be preferred by B to one that is more favorable. The two cases are illustrated in Figure 10.3. In both cases diagonal lines indicating successive levels of (B—A) have been drawn to permit easy comparison of different Th pairs. By the max rel criterion person B prefers points located farthest toward the lower right portion of the plot. Thus by this criterion he would prefer T to T’ in both cases in Figure 10.3. In Case I, however, T’ extends the A-comp set in a direction favorable to B and in Case II T’ curtails the B-comp set in a direction favorable to him. In both cases the T’ pairs seem to provide B witha better bargaining position. Thus, if the matrices were such that he could impose either T or T’ on the dyad, the T’ pair would be the better one. The implication of these cases for our simulation of the interaction is that the Th point should be identified after the frontier points have been identified. The optimal threat point is the one that results when each person seeks a way in which unilaterally he can establish a favorable max rel position and either reduce the size of his own compliance set or increase the size of his partner’s. Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship Once the viable points on the frontier have been identified and classified as IA or Rew, A-comp, and B-comp they are listed according to each person’s preferences. The process of reaching agreement on some mode of action or trade off can then be thought of as one in which each person moves down his preference ordering until they come to the same outcome pair and this forms the basis for agreement. In A’s preference ordering B-comp pairs, if any exist, will come first, followed by either the IA or Rew pairs. A-comp pairs will be at the bottom of the list. B’s preference ordering will have acomplementary structure, with A-comp pairs, if any exist, heading the list. In the simplest cases the IA pair or the same Rew pair will be at the top of the two persons’ preference orders and they can agree—either to leave each other alone and go their respective independent ways or to take joint action to attain the Rew pair. These two cases are illustrated in Figure 10.4 by correspondent MBC and MDG, respectively. In the more complex and common cases one or both will have Comp pairs as their first preferences and negotiation will ensue (see Chicken in Figure 10.4). Similarly, even when there are no Comp pairs, if there are multiple Rew pairs negotiation will be necessary to reach agreement on one of them (see PDG in Figure 10.4). When the negotiation includes Comp pairs, there is the possibility of imposed joint action; that is, of settlement on a pair that puts one person Y/ / Ow aa _— High Fi igure 10 -3 Optimal threat pairs for person B. Analysis of four patterns in terms of settlement points. Figure 10.4 below his IA level. This is particularly likely when the Comp sets are asymmetrical in relation to IA, as in Case I of Figure 10.3, in which A is likely to have to agree to a trade off that will put him below IA. At this point we have made rough predictions about the course of the relationship. Depending on what each person finds at the top of his preference ordering of the frontier pairs of outcomes, each may act independently, jointly pursue a Rew point, or negotiate. Many relationships will require the last because the first preferences will not be compatible. Therefore, although we cannot make further clear predictions about the course of affairs, we must consider the process of negotiation. How is it that a person gives up his attempt to gain his preferred outcomes and looks further down in his preference order? What appeals does he make to and receive from his partner? What order is there to the process of finding a reasonable basis for agreement when the interests of the two persons, at least as among the frontier points, are in direct opposition? To these questions we now turn. Negotiation In general, negotiation involves two interdependent persons who are seeking an agreement that will make them both better off than at their respective bargaining positions. Figure 10.5 is a simple case. This is the situation we have described in which the two persons bargain over the values in the Rew set. In the absence of a Th pair, the IA pair of outcomes defines their respective bargaining positions. Three pairs of outcomes from the matrix are found in the Rew set, but inasmuch as there is the possibility of arranging a trade off between two or more of them only the most profitable (i.e., only the frontier pairs) are shown in the figure. Among the frontier pairs there is no mutual basis for selecting one rather than another. At this point our model of the process must become nonspecific, as we move from reasons for action that havea logical appeal for both persons to reasons that, although not without force, are more debatable and therefore less compelling. The former are epitomized by the argument that ‘We'll both be better off if .. .’” and the latter by “We'll come out with equal gainsif. . .” The latter are the arguments of equality and equity. What force they have comes from the important fact that some agreement is to be preferred by both persons. Because in that basic sense both are in the same boat, the costs of nonagreement (it can be argued) should fall equally on both, and, conversely, the profits from agreement should be equally shared by both. Thus in Figure 10.5, although A Prefers agreements close to x and B prefers those close to y, the equality argument can be made for one close to the 50:50 line. High Zero Zero High Figure 10.5 Negotiation diagram with bargaining among members of the Rew set. Matters are rarely as simple as shown in Figure 10.5. Usually there are multiple baselines from which the bargaining occurs (Figure 10.6). In Case I the JA pair itself does not yield equal outcomes for A and B and two different equality arguments can be made, one with respect to the absolute values of any pair (to be referred to as an equality argument) and the other with respect to the two persons’ gains in relation to the IA pair (to be referred to as anequity argument). The latter type of argument asserts that ina sense the IA pair represents the true zero point of the relationship, for it specifies what each person can generate ‘for himself,”” so to speak, in the absence of joint action. (In equity theory terms it represents his value, investments, and resources.) The argument continues that even though one person is better off than the other at IA he deserves to be so and accordingly deserves a similar advantage in the eventual agreement. It can be seen that in Case I in Figure 10.6 A will make this equity argument and B will make the equality argument. At this point our model has made its predictions about the process and must leave some uncertainty about the outcome. In general, of course, we might expect the final agreement to be some compromise between those indicated by the two arguments. The most complex negotiation situation is shown in Case II in Figure 10.6. Here, in addition to the equity argument based on JA, A can introduce an equity argument based on the Th pair. His assertion is that High Zero High Case II High Zero Zero High Figure 10.6 Negotiation diagrams with multiple baselines. the Th pair defines the real baseline for each person in that he can ensure that they will get no more than their outcomes there. It will be clear from the figure that the force of this argument depends on how much A’s outcomes in the Th pair surpass B’s; that is, the amount A stands to gain from this equity consideration depends on how usable the Th pair is for A. Figure 10.7 shows the effect of the Th pair in a situation in which IA is on the frontier. From this example it is apparent that the threat-based equity argument may suffice to induce B to agree to an outcome below IA. High Zero High Figure 10.7 Negotiation diagram with bargaining between IA pair and B-Comp set. Although the Th pair may afford a basis for one person’s equity arguments, it would be wrong to conclude that these arguments have the same meaning and persuasiveness as those based on IA. In the one case ([A-based arguments) the assertion is “I deserve such and such because of what we would get if we go our individual ways.” In the other case (Th-based arguments), the argument is “I deserve such and such because of what we would get if I impose the threat outcomes on us.” There is clearly a difference in the implied locus of causation for the nonagreement outcomes, the former stemming from the structure of the relationship and the latter from the willful intervention of one person. The import of this difference is uncertain, but in general we might expect Th-based equity arguments to have less effect on the agreement because of the resistance they are likely to arouse by their implication that the relationship is subject to unilateral definition. Yet the difference is one of degree. It is, after all, the structure of the relationship that provides one person with the means for threatening the other. The difference is between (a) acting ina rather direct ends-oriented way (as in asserting one’s intention to pursue the IA in the absence of agreement) and (b) acting in an indirect means-oriented way (as in asserting one’s intention to impose the Th pair in the absence of a certain type of agreement). Certainly one major exception to the generalization that a Th-based equity argument has less persuasiveness than one that is [A-based occurs when the Th-based argument coincides with (or is close to) the equality argument. This is illustrated by the version of the Threat game shown in Figure 10.8. The Th pair is useful for B, for the (A-B) difference in outcomes is smaller than in the IA pair. It therefore becomes a basis for negotiating a trade off between the IA pair and the single member of the A-comp set. Because the Th pair is at (0,0), its derivative equity argument coincides with an argument for equality of outcomes. If the Th pair yields the same difference between A’s and B’s outcomes as the IA pair, it may provide no different basis for agreement than the IA pair. We may say that no usable threat exists for either person in such a case. Yet, if the Th point is different from the IA pair, it affords an additional argument for reaching some agreement; that is, it can be used by either person to press for agreement. We might expect the I[A-based equity argument to carry more weight in this case. The Comparison Level for Alternatives as a Bargaining Position As noted in Chapter 3, the matrix may be used to represent the consequences of each person’s being “in” or “out” of the dyadic relationship. Thibaut and Kelley (1959) defined the person’s CL,), as the lowest level of outcomes the person will accept in the light of his/her available alternative opportunities and relationships. The person’s CL, thus constitutes a potential bargaining position from which to negotiate outcomes within the given relationship. We can now see that, depending on the circumstances, the CL,,, may correspond to an IA or a Th pair. The two possibilities are shown in Figure 10.9. Each person is shown to have two behavioral choices within the relationship (@ ,anda for A and b, and b, for B). The consequences of one or both person’s leaving the relationship are shown in terms of the values of their respective CL,),s. (This glosses over a problem mentioned on p. 72.) In Case I, with independent action, B chooses b,, and taking account of B’s choice A chooses his CL,),. Thus the A B Figure 10.8 Matrix and negotiation diagram for the threat game. CL,;, values (8 for A and 4 for B) constitute the IA pair. As shown in the bargaining space at the right, the IA affords a bargaining position from which it is reasonable for the two persons to negotiate some turn-taking arrangement between the a2, and ab, cells within the relationship. By contrast, in Case II in Figure 10.9 the CL,), values constitute a Th point. The IA pair (7,6) results from B’s independent preference forb, and A’s similar preference fora. In generating a threat point, A takes his CL,), [ this maximizes (A-B) in the face of B’s choice of b, as a way of minimizing (A-B). ]The Th point provided by the CL,), values favors A and affords a alt Case II Chai Figure 10.9 The CL,,, as IA (Case I) and as Th (Case II). basis for negotiating some trade off between the IA value and A’s most preferred outcome (11,3 at a,b,). The point of these examples is that the CL,,, may have different meanings as a bargaining position, corresponding to the different meanings of the IA and Th pairs. The examples show that its meaning depends on how the two CL,),$ compare with the outcomes to be obtained within the relationship and with one another. When the CL,), values are known only to the persons to whom they apply, as is commonly the case in bargaining relationships, their potential significance as IA versus Th points creates a source of ambiguity and misundertanding for the interaction. A person for whom the CL,), provides an IA bargaining position may be viewed by the partner as using the alternatives as a threat and therefore as exerting undue pressure to gain a favorable agreement. Some Qualifications The preceding discussion has assumed that equity arguments are used to lay claim to outcomes that afford the two persons equal increments above the bargaining points, whether IA or Th. It must be noted that a different argument can be made, notably one that the ratio of outcomes at the bargaining point should be maintained at the settlement point. The implication of an equal ratio argument is shown in Figure 10.10 for the situation in Case I of Figure 10.6. Because the ratio of outcomes at IA favors A over B, the equal ratio argument favors him even more than the equal increment argument and the gap between the equity and the equality positions is widened. The equal ratio argument can be made only when there are meaningful zero points for the outcome scales, and is probably more likely to be invoked when ratio scales such as time, money, and weight are involved, and when they are commensurable between A and B. High Zero Zero High Figure 10.10 Equal-ratio equity argument for Case I in Figure 10.6. Earlier we distinguished cooperative joint action from imposed joint action. It must now be admitted that there is no sharp dividing line between these categories. As the agreement within the Rew set moves closer to the IA level for one person, the agreement becomes to a degree imposed on that person. Similarly, as the agreement within the B-comp set approaches the IA level, it probably seems less a matter of compulsory agreement and takes on some of the qualities of a mutually cooperative action. How do these equality arguments relate to value transformations? First, they are operative in relation to outcomes in the effective matrix, that is, in relation to outcomes that may already have been subjected to some transformation. Second, they are arguments directed toward producing a basis for agreement. As such they may introduce further prosocial transformation, but their primary function is that of facilitating agreement. The two phenomena are closely related because they derive their existence from the same facts of interdependence. In concluding this description of a model of action for the dyad, it should be noted that involved here is a logical and analytical structure that is independent of the matrix analysis. The model begins with the definition of pivotal pairs of outcomes, the bargaining positions, and uses them to classify the frontier pairs in terms of possible settlement points. These pairs are then ranked according to each person’s preferences and the two rank orders are examined for what they make probable in terms of negotiation, action, and so on. The latter implications can be translated readily back into matrix terms; for example, pairs of actions or coordinated trade offs between two pairs of actions. However, the intervening logic of the model, which consists of classification, rank orders, and implications, can be applied to sets of outcomes derived from any form of description of interdependence and does not require the matrix. Although the matrix analysis of interdependence is not essential for the model of action, it illustrates the central role that some conceptualization of interdependence (outcome control) must play in linking the terms of the model to specific behaviors in the relationship. The model requires some way of specifying (a) the control over their individual and joint outcomes the two persons can exercise independently and by joint action, and (b) the bases for threat each can establish by unilateral control over, for example, the magnitude of the difference between their outcomes. The matrix provides a specification of both plausible bargaining positions and of reasonable settlement points. It also determines the nature of the joint action necessary to yield any agreed-on outcomes. It is not necessary to spell out here all the links between the matrix and the model because they have been implied in preceding sections of this book; for example, in Chapter 5 on control over pair outcomes (the sum and difference scores) and in Chapters 4 and 6 on the turn-taking patterns and ratios necessary to yield certain allocations of outcomes between the two persons. A MODEL OF ACTION IN THE TRIAD: COALITION FORMATION In Chapter 9 we saw some reasons A and B might have for coordinating their actions in relation to C to induce him to act a certain way or to prevent him from taking some action. We have also seen, in their types of control over C, A’s and B’s means of exercising this influence. We now consider these matters more generally by attempting to answer such questions as the following: which pair of a triad, if any, will work in concert in relation to the third? What is their purpose and what is the nature of their concerted effort? These questions concern the formation and actions of “coalitions,”’ the term coalition meaning ‘‘an alliance for combined action of distinct. persons. . .”” (Oxford English Dictionary). The essential observation is that two persons act in concert in relation to the third, usually against him. The combined action reflects an understanding between the two, either tacit or explicit, regarding some joint goal to be achieved and the means to do so. There may eventually be an agreement between the coalition and the third person, but there is always some difference between the within-coalition understanding and the understanding between it and the third person. A minimal difference is that the former precedes the latter. Our model of action in the triad is simply an expansion of that for the dyad, except that we must take account of a new type of action, namely, coalition action. This action consists of two persons behaving in concert in relation to the third in regard for their special convergence of interest and their common conflict with him. By coalition action a pair is often able to establish special bargaining positions, analogous to the IA and Th pairs but differing from those defined by independent individual effort in the triad. Figure 10.11 lists the possible types of viable outcome for the dyad and for the triad, respectively. For each kind of relationship the types of possible bargaining position are listed on the left and the settlement points associated with each bargaining position are listed on the right. (The reader will recall that for the dyad the IA point may also be a plausible settlement point, if it is on the frontier of the bargaining points. In the triad the same is true for IA and the various CoA points.) The greater number of possible bargaining positions and settlement points for the triad compared with the dyad reflects the greater number of different structural relations and dynamic processes possible in the triad. We shall now explain these various possibilities. Identifying the IA, Th, CoA, and CoTh Triplets Because each cell in the triadic relationship is specified by a triplet of outcomes, our first task is to define the various crucial triplets for the relationship. The IA and Th triplets are defined in the same way as the IA and Th pairs for the dyad except that they result from the pursuit by all three persons of their individual purposes. The IA triplet lists their respective outcomes when each one acts independently to maximize his outcomes, although taking account of what each of the others, similarly motivated, is likely to do. The Th triplet lists the outcomes resulting from the efforts of each to create an optimal bargaining position for himself. The same complications are here as for the dyad, but the Th triplet can be approximated by assuming that each person will try to maximize the difference between his own and the others’ combined outcomes. In addition to these triplets, there is the possibility that analogous but different triplets can be created by each pair of persons acting as a coalition against a third. These are referred to as coalition action (CoA) and coalition threat (CoTh) triplets. Each one that “‘exists’’ (that is different from the analogous IA or Th triplet) is given a prefix to indicate the particular pair of persons that create it. Thus the AB-CoA triplet listed in Figure 10.11 specifies the outcomes of the three persons when A and B work jointly to maximize their combined outcomes and when C, taking account of their actions, does his best to maximize his. Similarly, the BC-CotTh triplet describes what B andC can mobilize, by their joint effort, in the way of a threat to gain compliance from A. The important property of these bilaterally defined triplets is that they can be better for both members of the particular coalition than the comparable unilaterally defined triplets but never worse. (If they are equivalent to the comparable IA or Th triplet, we disregard them.) That they will never be worse is easy to understand. Rather than generate positions that are less beneficial for themselves, A and B can agree to act in the same way they would act independently in generating the IA or Th triplets. That these coalition triplets may be better than the IA and Th triplets follows from the fact (illustrated in Chapter 9) that by joint action A and B can delimit the interaction in different ways than would be possible if they worked independently, and some of these ways may be to their mutual advantage. DYAD TRIAD Bargaining Positions Settlement Points Bargaining Positions Settlement Points IA Rew IA Rew(IA) Th A-comp Th A-comp (Th) B-comp B-comp (Th) C-comp(Th) AB-comp(Th) AC-comp (Th) BC-comp(Th) AB-CoA Rew(AB-CoA) AC-CoA Rew(AC-CoA) BC-CoA Rew(BC-CoA) AB-CoTh C-comp(AB-CoTh) AC-CoTh B-comp(AC-CoTh) BC-CoTh A-comp(BC-CoTh) Figure 10.11 Possible types of bargaining positions and their associated settlement points in the dyad and triad. Figure 10.12 shows two examples in which AB-CoA yields better outcomes than IA for both A and B. In the course of independent action among the three persons in Example I, C follows his RC to choose c; and, knowing this, A chooses ay. Given the likelihood of those two actions, B follows his BC in the c, submatrix to choose by. These actions yield the triplet (+4, +2, +5). In contrast, by coalition action, A and B can ensure themselves the triplet (+6, +6, 0). In Example II the IA triplet (+2, +2, +10) results if, anticipating that C will choose cz, A and B follow their respective RC’s in thec, submatrix. By a coordinated trade off betweena,b, anday,b, (assuming C stays atc.) they can attain a number of triplets such as (+3, +9, +2) or (+6, +6, +2) which are better for both. This example shows the important fact that unlike IA the AB-CoA set can include a number of triplets rather than only one. More on this in a moment. The example in Figure 10.13 shows how AB-CoTh can be more advantageous for A and B than the independently produced Th triplet. In their independent attempts to define self-advantageous threat points A maximizes the value [A — (B + C)/2], B maximizes [B — (A + C)/2], and C maximizes [C —(A +B)/2]. The last leads C to choose c , and in that half of the matrix A chooses a, and B chooses b,. Acting as a coalition, A and B work together to maximize [(A + B)/2 — C]. With this criterion, given C’s choice of c, (he continues to maximize [C — (A + B)/2]), they agree to the Example I IA = +4, Pa jorab Ag bp Cy AB-CoA +6, +6, 0 at ay b, Cy Example II +10 IA es +2, +2, +10 at a,b, Cy AB-CoA = set of triplets resulting from alternation between 4, b; c and & by &. Figure 10.12 Examples in which AB-CoA is better for both A and B than IA. Th = (4, 6, 5) at a, be AB-CoTh = (10, 0, —5) at a, b; c Figure 10.13 Examplein which AB-Coth is more advantageous to bothA andB than Th. a,b, pair. The resulting AB-CotTh triplet is more useful for them as a threat than Th because their joint advantage over C is greater. By threatening to enact thea,b, pair they are in a better position to induce C’s agreement toa contract favorable to their joint interest. It will be noted that the possible costs of the threat action are not borne equally by the members of the A-B coalition. If they find it necessary to carry out the threat action, B will suffer lower outcomes than A. This may be expected to affect differentially the two persons’ willingness to establish a coaliton in order to threaten C. Both CoA and CoTh sets may include more than one triplet of outcomes. This follows from the simple fact that any outcome or position defined by agreement among two or more persons may, for certain matrices, include a number of possible outcome triplets. This means that the coalition members may have to negotiate between themselves the division of rewards available in the CoA set. Also, in their use of the CoTh set as a bargaining baseline they may have to negotiate how the costs of the threat action, if taken, are to be borne. This means that the coalition is often working from a set of points in the negotiation space rather than a single one and this has implications for possible conflict within the coalition and for its vulnerability to counter offers and threats from the third person. It will be clear from their definitions what the functions of the CoA and CoTh triplets are. Like IA, in some cases the CoA set may be part of what the persons negotiate about and in other cases, part of what they negotiate from. If functional at all, the CoTh triplet, like its Th counterpart, always plays the role of a position from which bargaining is conducted. Finally, it should be noted that just as a Th triplet may not differ from the IA triplet, so the AB-CoTh triplet may not differ from the AB-CoA triplet. From this it will be realized that although every triad will have an IA triplet it may or may not have a Th triplet and it may or may not have CoA triplets (i.e., different from the IA triplet). Given the existence of a Th triplet (different from the IA triplet), any coalition may or may not have a CoTh triplet (different both from the Th triplet and the appropriate CoA triplet). Classification of Triplets on the Frontier First, all the triplets of outcomes on the frontier can be classified with respect to the IA and Th triplets. The reader can visualize the possibilities here by imagining a three-dimensional version of Figure 10.1. The possible types of triplet that can be distinguished in relation to the IA and Th triplets are shown in the upper portion of the right-most column of Figure 10.11. Depending on the relative locations of the triplets in the threedimensional space describing the outcomes of A, B, andC and depending on the location and extent of the frontier, there may be Rew(IA) triplets (better than IA for all three persons), A-comp triplets (better than IA for B and C but between IA and Th for A), B-comp and C-comp triplets, AB—comp triplets (better than IA for C but between IA and Th for A and B), and BC-comp and AC-comp triplets. The implication of the last type of compliance triplet is, of course, that the Th triplet may provide a basis for one member of the triad to bring threat pressure to bear on both of the others. It would be among the BC-comp triplets that A might attempt to gain B’s and C’s compliance to his threat. There may be six different types of compliance triplet because any one or pair of the triad can be below their [A outcomes but above Th. All remaining points on the frontier, at which one or more of the triad is below Th, are not viable. The person(s) below Th would have no reason to enter into an agreement that would make any of these points possible. Second, as shown in Figure 10.11, the triplets on the frontier can also be classified with respect to each pair of CoA and CoTh triplets. Triplets better than AB-CoA for all three persons are labeled Rew(AB-CoA), those better than AC-CoA for all three, Rew(AC-CoA), and those better than BC-CoA for all three, Rew(BC-CoA). Similarly, triplets better than AB-CoA for A and B but between AB-CoA and AB-CoTh for C will be labeled C-comp (AB-CoTh) triplets. Logically, the same types of triplet may be distinguished in relation to each pair of CoA and CoTh triplets as are defined by the IA and Th triplets. Certain of the comp types, however, do not make sense psychologically. Thus the B-comp (AB-CoTh) triplets (in which A and C are above AB-CoA, but B is below AB-CoA, though above AB-CoTh) are not viable because B cannot be expected to participate in creating the AB-CoTh point in order to induce his own compliance to sub-AB-CoA outcomes. Thus, as listed in Figure 10.11, the only meaningful compliance triplets relative to actions of the A-Bcoalition are the C-comp (AB-CoTh) triplets, the only ones relevant to the A-C coalition are the B-comp (AC-CoTh) triplets, and the only ones relevant to the B-C coalition are the A-comp (BC-CoTh) triplets. (Our notation is admittedly cumbersome for the reason that we have tried to preserve a high level of mnemonic value in the abbreviations. The reader will observe in Figure 10.11 that the notation for each settlement point includes a parenthetical suffix that describes the bargaining position with respect to which the settlement point is viable.) The purpose of this second classification is, of course, to specify the ways in which coalition action in the triad may affect the meaning and control of the frontier points. A clear example of change in meaning would be a triplet that is labeled both rew and AB-CoA. Without the formation of a coalition, this triplet is accessible only by three-way cooperative action. The second label, however, means that by their concerted effort A and B can provide the triplet themselves (assuming only that C will not interfere with a threat). In brief, each point on the frontier is potentially given four tags, one to indicate its position in relation to each of the four sets of reference points. If a given CoA or threat (Th or CoTh) triplet is missing, it, of course, does not affect the classification and is reflected in none of the labels. A triplet that is not viable with respect to a given set of reference points will simply receive no label referring to that set, and triplets that have no labels (i.e., that are not viable from any perspective) are simply eliminated from further consideration. Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship Again, once the frontier points have been tagged as described, they are listed for each person from most to least preferred. In general, each person’s list will have the same general structure; for example, person A’s list will generally have C-comp (AB-CoTh), B-comp (AC-CoTh), BC-comp, B-comp, and C-comp triplets as most preferred. Next in order will be Rew(AB-CoA) and Rew(AC-CoA) or AB-CoA and AC-COA triplets, followed closely by IA or Rew triplets. Least preferred will be triplets requiring his compliance such as A-comp (BC-CoTh) or AB-comp triplets. The decision process by which the triad agrees on a pattern of action can be thought of in terms of a series of concessions, with each person moving down his preference order until an appropriate set of labels is reached. This does not require agreement on the same triplet. One of the ‘“‘emergent’’ phenomena of the triad is that under certain conditions a pair of persons can absolutely require the third to accept a nonpreferred triplet, namely, a CoA triplet. As mentioned earlier, the greater variety of possible events in the triad compared with the dyad is indicated by the greater variety of types of triplet that may occur in each person’s preference list. The greater variety of means by which actions are decided on is indicated by the greater array of triplets that may be used to define minimal bargaining positions. Triad Action Without Coalition We consider first some of the possible situations in the triad that are similar to those in the dyad. In all these cases there is no CoA triplet not equal to the IA triplet and no CoTh triplet not equal to the Th triplet. Consequently, joint action by the members of any potential coalition is not relevant to the outcome. No pair can do any better for itself in the context of two-versus-one action than any individual can in the threeway context, and no pair can create a more useful threat position by concerted action than any individual can by independent action. The simplest case is that in which there are also no Comp triplets, Th being equal to IA. Under these conditions the three persons may act independently and take the IA triplet (if it is on the frontier) or they may act jointly to attain one of the Rew triplets. If there are several Rew triplets, they will negotiate among them from the position of the IA triplet. A somewhat more complex situation develops when there are comp triplets. The negotiation then proceeds over the union of the sets of comp triplets and either the IA or Rew triplets, each person making his claims from the Th position and, if it is not on the frontier, the IA point. The novel aspect of this situation in the triad is that the Th triplet may be usable in several quite different ways, namely, (a) by one person against the other two, (b) by two persons against the third, or (c) by one person against the other two and by the second person against the third. A simple example illustrates these possibilities. (It assumes no outcome transformation, it must be noted. The values given are the effective ones.) Three youngsters will be given $15 if they can agree on how to divide it among themselves. If they cannot agree, each will be given $4 (IA =4, 4, 4). An additional rule specifies that any one of them can by unilateral action (as by saying “I quit’’) cause them to receive a still different set of outcomes. In Case I this Th triplet yields 0, 0, 0 for A, B, and C, respectively; in Case IL it yields 3, 0, 0; in Case IIL it yields 3, 3, 0; and in Case IV it yields 4, 2, 0. In Case I Th is no more usable by one boy than by another. Its presence merely increases the importance of some agreement and of not aggravating any boy by pressing him to take a small share of the $15. In Case II boy A stands to gain some advantage from using the threat because he has the least to lose by quitting. He might make the Th-based equity argument (an equal increment argument) that out of the $15 he should receive his $3 first and then the remaining $12 can be divided equally, yielding a 7, 4, 4 outcome (a triplet on the margin between the reward set and the BC-comp set). Similarly, Case III favors both boy A and boy B. Either one of them can generate the Th triplet. If A suggests that it implies he should get a larger share than one-third, B will very likely assert that the same principle applies to his situation, and C becomes the one under pressure to move away from an equality-based agreement. Simple equity would give3 each to A and B and divide the remaining 9 among the three, for a 6, 6, 3 outcome, a member of the C-comp set. Case III must not be confused with AB-CotTh, where A andB must work in concert to create the threat triplet. Case III is simply an example in which the rules of the game favor both A and B as individuals and work to the disadvantage of C. A and B are in the same respective situations in relation to their partners and therefore can be expected to act similarly, but there is no basis for their joint action. Case IV is rather complex. Person A is no worse off if the threat is used than if they merely fail to agree. (Remember that he cannot be better off in the Th triplet than at IA or the Th triplet would simply become the IA point.) He clearly can be more casual about taking the threat action than either B or C. Boy B, though concerned to avoid anyone’s quitting, is less so than. An equity outcome would yield 7, 5, 3, again a member of the C-comp set. One point of this example and its variations is simply that even in the absence of coalition action the phenomenon of threat takes a greater variety of forms in the triad than in the dyad. Triad Action with Coalition The simplest case of coalition involves no threat points (no Th or CoTh triplets) but only CoA triplets. Thus A’s preference order, for example, may have Rew(AB-CoA), Rew(AC-CoA), AB-CoA, or AC-CoA triplets at the top of the list and IA and Rew triplets at the bottom. If two persons come to their common CoA point as they work down their lists, they can require the third person to accept their set of outcomes; for example, if the AB-CoA point is on the frontier and A and B move to it in their respective preference orders (perhaps after each has passed up a few Rew triplets that were not acceptable to each other or to C), they can instate it as a settlement point. They can do so despite the fact that C may prefer one or more Rew triplets to the AB-CoA point. It is not a matter of imposing it by threat but simply a matter of A and B acting together and limiting C merely to doing his best for himself. Similarly, the AB-CoA point, although not on the frontier, may define some Rew(AB-CoA) triplets that A and B prefer to the Rew triplets but that C regards in a less favorable light. By their ability to force the trio to the AB-CoA triplet (in the absence of an effective threat for C), A and B can require C either to negotiate an agreement among the Rew(AB-CoA) triplets or to take the less good AB-COoA value. Consider the following game as an example: by unanimous agreement on its allocation the three persons will be given $15. Alternatively, if both agree to doso, A and B can receive $6 each. In the absence of either type of agreement, each person gets nothing. Thus IA = 0, 0, 0; AB-CoA = 6, 6, 0; Rew = all triplets summing to 15 in which each person’s outcome is greater than 0; and Rew(AB-CoA) =7, 7, 1 (the single allocation of 15 that puts each person above AB-CoA). Persons A and B can limit C’s choice to the Rew (AB-CoA) or the AB-CoA triplet. Note that there are Rew triplets thatA might prefer to the Rew(AB-CoA) triplet (e.g., 9,3, 3), but he has no better means of inducing the others to accept such triplets than each of them has for inducing him to accept other triplets disadvantageous to him. When A and B both recognize the futility of trying to attain such individually advantageous contracts, they will both move down their preference orders to the Rew(AC-CoA) triplet for which, as a coalition, they can make a compelling case. Agreement within a coalition may not come so easily as the above example suggests. It will be recalled that AB-CoA may be a set of triplets rather than a single one and this may force A and B to negotiate among them oramong a number of Rew(AB-CoA) triplets. Let us modify the above example merely by assuming that the alternative to a three-way agreement on a division of $15 is A and B’s agreement on a division of $12 (rather than a fixed $6 each). Now AB-CoA can yield any triplet in which both A andB have more than 0 (their outcomes in the IA triplet). Thus (11, 1, 0), (10, 2, 0), (9, 3, 0), . ., (2, 10, 0), and (1, 11, 0) are members of the AB-COA set, and (12, 2, 1), (11, 3, 1), (10, 4, 1), and so on, are members of the Rew(AB-CoA) set. Clearly the AB-CoA set delimits the set of divisions of $15 that A and B will consider; for example, precluding an equal division (5, 5, 5). Although A and B can agree, however, that C should receive no more than 1 (his minimal price for agreeing to any three-way split of the $15 and all they can afford to give him while still giving themselves some motivation for a three-way rather than a two-way agreement), they have no structural basis for choosing among the Rew(AB-CoA) triplets. Therefore at the same time that they are jointly convincing C of the necessity of accepting a minimal share of the $15, they must negotiate between themselves a division of the rest. Of course, a (7, 7, 1) agreement has the appeal of equality between A and B, and in the absence of any basis for either of them to claim more we might expect it to be their ultimate allocation. The situation may change radically if, as we consider below, the Th or JA triplets favor either of them. It may happen that any one of two or three coalitions is viable within the triad. Consider the simpler case first in which as the three move down their preference orders A comes to AB-CoA, B comes to both AB-CoA and BC-CoA, andC comes toBC-CoA. PersonA now calls for the formation of the A-B coalition, C calls for the BC coalition, andB has an interest in the formation of both coalitions. A simple example would be a game in which either A and B or B and C can divide $10, whichever pair can agree on an allocation. Person B is clearly in an enviable position, sought after by both A andC asa coalition partner. Because A’s and C’s alternatives to being in the coalition are both zero, each of them should be willing to offer B a lion’s share of the $10. B bargains with each of them from the position of the CoA triplets he can generate with the other. Neither structurally nor in terms of equity arguments is there any basis for predicting which of the two coalitions will form—only that B will receive a large part of the $10. A similar case is one in which each of the three possible coalitions is desired by both its members. The example game is one in which any pair can have $10 if it can agree on its allocation. This case, like the foregoing, permits of no prediction about which coalition will eventually form. Any tentative agreement by A and B can, in principle, always be upset by C’s offering one of them more if he will join the A-C or B-C coalition. The costs of negotiation and the risk of getting nothing by failure of some agreement exert influence toward stable agreement within some pair and the symmetry of dependence argues for an equal split within that pair. These examples, lacking Th and CoTh triplets, involve bargaining merely from the IA and CoA triplets. With the addition of threat triplets the agreement process is likely to include pressures on one or more members of the triad to accept compliance triplets. For example, with a three-way agreement the trio can share $15; in the absence of agreement each one will receive $3. Alternatively, if A and B agree to it, they will divide $4 andC will receive nothing. The AB-CoTh triplets are as follows: (4, 0, 0), (3, 1, 0), (2, 2, 0), (1, 3, 0), and (0, 4, 0). By threatening to impose one of these A and B can agree that C should accept an asymmetrical split such as (7, 7, 1) which puts C below IA (3, 3, 3). A and B’s position is not so clear-cut as it would be if there were only one AB-CoTh triplet (e.g., if their alternative pairwise agreement yielded each a fixed $2). Thus C would find some additional basis for resisting the threat (beyond the sizable inequality it implies) in the possibility that A and B might not readily agree on exactly how to back it up. The reader will note the difference between the kinds of “game” rules in these allocation examples that underlie the CoA triplets versus the CoTh triplets. The AB-CoA triplet is based on a rule that permits A and B to assure themselves better outcomes than they would receive if a three-way agreement were not forthcoming. In contrast, the AB-CoTh triplet is based on a rule that gives them as well as C less than what the failure of three-way agreement yields. From the preceding considerations it will be clear that once the possibilities exist for coalition formation within the triad (once there are CoA and CoTh triplets) the ideal position of a particular member of the triad is to be the favored member of a favored coalition. As we have seen, a number of different configurations can create this ideal position. One is that in which only one coalition has one highly favorable CoA triplet, and in that triplet the particular person is strongly favored; for example, a three-way agreement can divide $15, but a two-way agreement between A and B can yield them $9 and $6 respectively. A second case is one in which only two coalitions have highly favorable CoA triplets and the particular person is the common member of both. In a third case the AB-CoA or Rew(AB-CoA) triplets, whichever are on the frontier, are negotiable between A and B, and the other coalition triplets are missing, but the IA and/or Th triplets favor A. This puts A in a strong position to induce B to enter a coalition with him but on terms that yield A a large share of the coalition’s benefits. It is instances of this last kind that form the basis for the generalization that each person will seek the coalition in which the coalition’s power vis-a-vis the third person and his own power vis-a-vis his coalition mate are maximized. The importance of both factors in a person’s choice is shown by the fact that he will sometimes prefer a less beneficial coalition in which he is the favored person to a more beneficial coalition in which he is disfavored.

