A Kind of Theory, 315 Limitations of the Matrix Concepts, 316 Essential Aspects of Present Theory, 317 Taxonomy of Interdependent Relationships, 317 Interdependence Patterns as Problems, 318 Functional Analysis, 319 The Transformation Process, 319 Attributional and Presentational Phenomena Created by the Transformation Process, 320 Historical Notes, 321 Further Developments, 325 Levels of Interdependence, 325 Functional Accounts of Motivation, 326 i “i am bith @ ti ae WIV] al hope plies ae iy 5 Teeth, one a f Liiqragl hg ‘ig > Spo Fi rv rh wit teal @ uN rere bal i a ° iss hy ae a Ses he he i ae d z iy e sf @ pare mn bee) ahi i oe ow, , ia ar oI ee us ae iaorndel €h,, bat gy os ae ica) Se ve ve: Vie yates v3. i sti t ne ta tw! ; a lc toaly, is” in elke ABSTRACT This chapter provides a brief interpretive commentary on the theoretical ideas presented in this book. An outline of the kind of theory developed here lists its essential points. Some historical notes relate our central assumptions and orienting ideas to those of Kurt Lewin. A final section highlights several further lines of development of the present theoretical approach. A KIND OF THEORY Our purpose in this section is to make explicit what was implicit in the preceding chapters by describing in general terms the kind of theory presented in this book. It must be admitted that this represents a set of post hoc insights on our part. In advance of our work on this book we did not have clearly in mind the kind of theory outlined here. Rather we developed, in a rather exploratory and piecemeal way, the concepts we found to be needed to deal with certain basic observations and data from the social psychological study of interpersonal relations. After the fact we found it natural to organize the various ideas in the manner of the preceding chapters. Now, still further after the fact, we are able to step back and examine in more general terms the kind of theory we have evolved and perhaps suggest reasons why that kind of theory is needed. To speak of and endorse the kind of theory that is represented is to imply that other versions of this kind of theory can be developed. It is precisely our purpose to emphasize that possibility and to urge its realization.We believe that as other means are developed for the systematic characterization and analysis of social interdependence a different theory of this sort can be developed. We also mean to suggest that any such theory should deal with the same problems that we have and will probably have the same general terms; in that sense, it will be the same kind. That is to indicate our confidence that our analysis has revealed many essential aspects of interpersonal relations—aspects that no theory can overlook—as well as our conviction that our general approach to conceptualizing these aspects is, in the long run, a viable one. Limitations of the Matrix Concepts It is our hope that the reader who has followed the successive developments in this book faithfully will agree with our high regard for the outcome matrix as a conceptual tool for the analysis of social interdependence. Even the minimal matrix, the2 x2, describes a diverse array of interpersonal structures and is richly suggestive of the processes associated with them. This matrix, however, has certain limitations that lead us to suspect that it will eventually be replaced as the central analytic device (with the result, as suggested, that the kind of theory presented here will have to be rewritten in terms of somewhat different interdependence concepts). In its application to specific cases there are certain ambiguities in the delineation of the outcome matrix. One problem has to do with specifying the behavioral options for each person. This is misleadingly easy in experimental application of the matrix but often an uncertain matter for natural relationships. It seems clear that the options identified by an outsider may be quite different from those distinguished by the persons themselves. Our distinction (in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959, and in Chapter 1 of this book) between the ‘‘objective’” and “‘subjective’”’ matrix recognizes this fact. The notion of the objective matrix is based on the assumption that a well-informed and thorough analysis can identify more accurately than can the participants the structure of their relationship. (The attributional assumptions here are obvious: a number of independent, objective, and expert analysts, if given sufficient information—about this and similar relationships—can make more veridical discriminations and judgments than can the involved participants with their limited perspectives.) According to this view, the objective matrix represents a causal structure which, whether recognized or not, plays a shaping role in the relationship and is therefore a reality of which it would be well for the participants to become cognizant. An important line of analysis and research for the future will have the purpose of determining the course of development in persons’ understandings of their interdependence. Because there can be two different subjective views of the same dyadic matrix (cf. Ingmar Bergman’s Scenes from a Marriage), this analysis must identify the conditions that promote convergence in their understandings. In addition, as the concept of objective matrix highlights, we must identify processes that promote greater insight into and pursuit of the full range of possibilities immanent in their relationship. These processes will include the creative imagining and construction of new options that have not, perhaps, been available in the common examples of similar relationships. Beyond the various ambiguities associated with the definition of the interdependence matrix its more serious limitations seem to lie in its static nature. The future elaboration of interdependence theory will profit most, in our estimation, from the development of concepts that lend themselves not only to characterizing the patterns at any given point in time but also to describing their temporal trends and changes. Fruitful initial steps would consist of specifying rules for generating scenarios of interaction from structural patterns of interdependence. Such rules would have to take account of the implications of the outcome matrix identified in Chapter 10. In addition, a temporal analysis will have to take account of various process constraints. It is well known, from numerous experimental studies, that the process that develops in a particular game depends not only on its pattern but also on such factors as the players’ information, their opportunities for communication, and the conditions that determine the timing and visibility of their choices. [An important though often overlooked aspect of the original story of the Prisoner’s Dilemma (see p. 42) is that the district attorney constrained the decision process in a particular way. By separating the prisoners and requiring them to make independent decisions without communication, he increased the likelihood of the particular outcome, mutual confession, that he preferred. | We have long been aware of temporal changes in many of the rewards and costs associated with behavior (cf. e.g., Chapter 1 in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). The short-term phenomena of satiation and fatigue require a model of interdependence that reflects the dependence of later outcomes on earlier ones. In addition, models intended to cover long-term trends in relationship dependencies must take account of changes, with maturation and aging, in motives and skills. These brief comments simply point to some of the limitations of the outcome matrix as the central concept for the analysis of interdependence. The present theory was developed with the matrix as its major instrument. With drastic modifications in or replacements of that device, the theory will have to be rewritten. The general form of what we have done, however, is not dependent on the outcome matrix. We shall try to describe the general characteristics of the present formulation. Essential Aspects of Present Theory Taxonomy of Interdependent Relationships Our analysis centers around an examination of types of interpersonal relationship in which they are described and differentiated in terms of interdependence. This is a uniquely social psychological focus, to be contrasted with a typology of persons (personality psychology) or of environments (environmental psychology). Interdependence Patterns as Problems The particular pattern of interdependence that characterizes a relationship determines the special set of problems confronting it. The taxonomy of relationships is, then, a taxonomy of problems, each type of interdependence pattern involving its unique problematic aspects and implying the necessary elements of solution. These problems exist for the individuals involved and for the collectivity (dyad, triad, etc.) they constitute. In the collectivity the problems are often shared in the sense that one person’s solution depends on another’s solution. Thus the possibility exists for dealing with the commonalities among the individual problems by way of coordinated.or joint solutions. Purposes Served by the Components Analysis. The outcome matrix was our conceptual device for developing the taxonomy. It held out to us the attractive possibility of deriving qualitative differences among relationships from quantitative and configurational analysis. This analysis was conducted by identifying the components of the matrix, determining their relative magnitudes, and specifying their orientations (concordance, correspondence) in relation to one another. Specifically, the components analysis provided a useful bookkeeping system for exploring the domain of 2 x 2 interdependence matrices, identifying the salient patterns, and classifying them. It also pointed to a major kind of variation in type of joint problem; the central distinction between MFC and MBC served to highlight the difference between “exchange” and ‘‘coordination.” The components analysis also provided an analytic framework for identifying the antecedents of various patterns; for example, the factors underlying correspondence versus noncorrespondence of outcomes. In Chapter 9 the components analysis provided guides for dealing with the third person and the complexities in pattern arising from the expansion of the dyad into a triad. In brief, the components constituted the elements of the structural aspects of our analysis. In analogy to the role of atoms and molecules in chemical theory, in their variations in magnitudes and relative orientations, the several types of component generated qualitatively different patterns and types of phenomena. Functional Analysis The taxonomy of problems provided a basis for a functional analysis. We assumed that in their experience with the various problems and from the necessity of coping with them, people develop solutions to them. Adaptation to situations of social interdependence is viewed as the source of both social norms and individual rules. Adaptation is seen to result from multiple processes. In his own direct experience in interdependent relationships each individual has opportunities to learn useful rules, including both the prosocial, moral concepts and the more egocentric, practical rules of thumb for ‘getting along with people.” This experience is often preceded by and accompanied by social instruction in the moral and practical aspects of social relationships, which involve both explicit teaching and the provision of exemplars of social behavior. In the course of its history mankind has long encountered the basic types of interdependence and problems we have identified. In the collective wisdom about social life an understanding of the important variations of interpersonal relationships and of useful ways of dealing with them is implicit. Ordinarily, the instruction provided the individual by lecture and model will be consistent with his own experience; hence the two modes of acquisition will be mutually reinforcing. Inconsistency will occur at times of sharp social and technological change as when changing sex role conceptions render outmoded the earlier behavioral rules that assumed a high degree of asymmetry in dependence within the heterosexual dyad. The preceding comments should not be taken to imply an assumption that the moral and practical rules that persons commonly follow are optimally adapted to the nature of their interdependent relationships. We have seen that the functionally optimal rules are highly contingent, that they depend both on the nature of the relationship and the transformations that partners make. This complexity suggests that the adaptation people make to the requirements of their relationships are often likely to be imperfect. The Transformation Process The solutions to the problems of interdependence often require that behavior be freed from control by the actor’s immediate situation. It must become partially responsive to the situations of other persons and to possible future situations. This was demonstrable for various matrices in our taxonomy of relationships and must be true for interdependence problems, however described. We have found it useful to describe this process in terms of a shift from the given to the effective matrix—a transformation of the given matrix into one that controls behavior. The conceptual step taken here, of assuming that a person responds to a particular given situation as if it were a different one, has the important consequence of enabling both given and effective situations to be described in the same terms—in our case in matrix terms. The common terms of description in turn make it possible to examine the given situations from the point of view of what transformations are logically possible and which of them serve to yield better given outcomes than if the given situation were reacted to directly. The end result of this conceptual strategy is that it becomes plausible to describe what the person learns, as ways of dealing with problems of interdependence, in terms of matrixtransforming rules, values, and sequences. The specific psychological processes involved (control of attention and thought, binding of tension, and self-regulation of motivation) were not an explicit part of our analysis but it contains useful implications for the delineation of such processes (see pp. 202-206). Attributional and Presentational Phenomena Created by the Transformation Process The loosening of the linkage between behavior and the immediate situation involved in the transformation process introduces a set of causal factors into behavior that are intimately concerned with and, indeed, define the person. It is at the transformation junction in the chain of behavioral causation that the person appears as a causal agent. To other persons this means that the voluntary and conscious factors (e.g., ego strength, character, will power) underlying the person’s behavior become apparent in contrast to external, situational factors (e.g., incentives, unconditioned stimuli) and internal, uncontrollable factors (biological drives, deeply rooted psychic needs). To the person himself the transformation process provides manifestations of the ‘‘self’”’ as an agent in control of his own behavior and outcomes. From the point of view of persons interdependent with an actor the transformation process creates the special set of attributional problems, outlined in Chapter 8, having to do with inferring the actor’s orientation to and long-range goals for the relationship. For the actor the transformation process provides opportunities for self-presentation. The “self” as a causal agent is made apparent to others (as, also, to the self) by means of behavior that is independent of the structure of the immediate situation. Self-presentation and, indeed, the very properties it is possible for an individual to show to others and to know about himself are determined by the structure of the interdependent situations in which he finds himself. An understanding of this basic fact underlies his decisions about entering or arranging situations with particular patterns of interdependence. The attributional problems of the actor’s various partners, created by the transformational process, have their parallels in the assessment problems that face the social psychologist. Faced with a heterogeneity of reactions to a specific set of incentives, we find it difficult to distinguish variations in given matrices from variations in the transformations made of them. Our doubts about the proper generalizations to be drawn from observed behavior are heightened by our awareness of the special selfpresentational tendencies that may be elicited by our subjects’ consciousness of the assessment context for their behavior. Some of these contextual matters are discussed briefly in Chapter 7. HISTORICAL NOTES It may add to the understanding of the central ideas in this book to relate them to certain earlier conceptions in social psychology. It is particularly useful to link them to and compare them with the ideas of the man with whom we took our graduate studies—Kurt Lewin. Although it is not our principal intention here, to highlight these intellectual roots of our basic ideas may also help to discourage the notion that we have some “‘ultimate loyalties” to Hullian learning theory, as suggested by Chadwick-Jones (1976, p. 64). In this and our earlier book we have found that ‘“behaviour theory” is useful at many points in our argument but the more fundamental notions are drawn from Lewin. Lewin’s influence is perhaps most strikingly present in the adoption of interdependence as the starting point of our analysis. This was the property to which Lewin gave a central position in his first papers in which he established the field of group dynamics. He wrote: ‘The essence of a group is not the similarity or dissimilarity of its members, but their interdependence. A group can be characterized as a ‘dynamic whole’; this means that a change in the state of any subpart changes the state of any other subpart’ (1948, p. 84). Interdependence, of course, can be given many different meanings depending on what changes in state are identified. Lewin’s topological concepts have had great usefulness in the analysis of the flow of information or influence among the members of a group (as in French, 1956; and Harary, Norman, and Cartwright, 1965). The motivational concepts, however, involving valences and their related force fields, were not readily adaptable to problems of outcome interdependence. The interdependence between persons in their locomotion toward goals was only awkwardly represented in the life space and only gross distinctions in types of interdependence were suggested (e.g., Deutsch’s promotive versus contrient interdependence, 1949). These limitations reflected the difficulties that Lewin encountered in formulating direction and the relative directions of different forces in the topologically defined life space (see Lewin, 1938, and Leeper’s critique, 1943). It should be noted that Lewin’s writings about social interdependence were limited to the last several years before his death. It seems clear that he was exploring a variety of ways to describe motivational interdependence and had not yet thoroughly developed any one way [cf. his pages on marital conflict (1948, pp. 84-102; 1951, pp. 188-237)]. As the reader of this book has seen, the analytic tool we have used, the outcome matrix, though not without its limitations, generates a rich set of suggestive distinctions among degrees and patterns of interdependence between persons in the attainment of their respective goals. The life space, with its topological analysis of path and goal regions and its vector analysis of the forces acting on the person, deals essentially with the decisions and problems facing a single person. The outcome matrix, in contrast, deals with the interweaving of the decisions of several persons and often (when there is some correspondence of outcomes) with their joint problems. Despite the different purposes of the two kinds of analysis, certain aspects of our general strategy in developing the outcome matrix follow Lewin’s precepts very closely. The Principle of Contemporaneity. Lewin emphasized that ‘any behavior or other change in a psychological field depends only upon the psychological field at that time” (1951, p. 45). This did not reflect a lack of interest in historical (developmental and learning) problems but was simply an insistence that the analysis of causal factors for a given event in the life space had to focus ultimately on processes contemporaneous with that event. We have followed this principle in our focus on the effective matrix. This summarizes the options and motives operative at the time of a given interaction and directly controlling the nature of that interaction. The antecedents of these causal factors are described in part by the given matrix and the transformations that are brought to bear on it. The more distal antecedents have been considered in our discussion of the psychological bases of rewards and costs and of behavioral facilitation and interference (Chapters 3 and 4 in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). Changes in the effective matrix, from one point in time to another, are treated in terms of the effects of long- and short-run changes in factors underlying the given rewards and costs (e.g., changes in needs and skills, satiation and fatigue effects) and shifts in the prevailing transformations. Taxonomy of Situations. Lewin was keenly aware of the importance of characterizing the behavioral field in ways that afford a basis for identifying different types of situation. Leeper (1943) made the following observation: The main point of departure for [Lewin’s ] work is the conviction that the influence of the situation (as personally organized or conceived) is . . so important and so complex that specialized, technical concepts must be developed that will increase our capacity to identify and understand the factors and relationships that are involved here (p. 13). Lewin’s analytic concepts were types of goal and force field and their positions in relation to one another. Best known is his analysis of types of conflict (approach-approach, avoidance-avoidance, approachavoidance) and variations in the locations of barriers (restraining forces) associated with each type of conflict (Lewin, 1935, pp. 87-94; 1946, pp. 809-815). This theoretical emphasis on a situational typology is directly reflected in Roger Barker’s endeavor to identify the important ‘behavior settings” that an individual enters during his daily life (1968). Our taxonomic efforts have focused on identifying types of interdependence in dyads and triads (see Chapter 11 in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959, and Chapters 4 and 9 of this book) and types of task that an interdependent pair may encounter (Chapter 9 in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). Like Lewin, we analyze the types of situation for the patterns of behavior they are likely to generate. Additionally, we investigate (Chapter 7 of this book) the various interdependence patterns for what they encourage in the development of generalized adaptational tendencies—the transformational rules and evaluative criteria that they make it desirable for individuals to adopt in order to facilitate efficient management of the conflict-creating properties of the situations. This point relates to those that follow. Cognitive Restructuring of the Field. Lewin (1946, pp. 802-804) observed that the behavioral field often posed problems for the person’s locomotion that could be solved by a cognitive restructuring of the field. His favorite example was the detour or Umweg problem in which the child was unable to circumvent a barrier until he identified a path of connected regions that went around the barrier and included the goal region. This “distinguished path” often required the child to turn his back on the goal and to move away from it temporarily in order, ultimately, to reach it. The detour concept is clearly apparent in our notion of value transformations; for example, the person suppresses his interest in his own outcomes and concerns himself with those of the partner in order to improve his own outcomes in the long run. The notion of selective suppression of one’s interests is similar to Lewin’s concept of potency of the situation. A choice problem can be seen as involving overlapping situations, one coordinated to each of the several alternative goals. Lewin described a decision as raising the potency of one of the situations permanently, thus enabling it to dominate the other situations. This phenomenon can be described in transformational terms, the rule being to make up one’s mind and then put the rejected alternatives out of mind. The functional value of this rule, in promoting conflict-free action, is apparent. The historical origin of Festinger’s (1957) ideas about a process of postdecisional reduction of cognitive dissonance is suggested here. The Motivational Properties of Conflict. Lewin postulated that conflict situations (individual decision conflicts) give rise to emotional tension, the intensity of which is a function of the strength of the opposing forces (Lewin, 1951, p. 268). Similarly, tension develops in cognitively unstructured situations in which there is uncertainty about paths to goals, inasmuch as such situations result in psychological conflict (Deutsch and Krauss, 1965, p. 45). The tension motivates restless exploratory behavior and, if not too great, promotes the solution of detour and other cognitive problems. We have relied on this property of situations of individual conflict and uncertainty in accounting for the existence of transformational tendencies. The motivation for the invention of transformations is seen to stem from the unpleasantness of situations that lack clear choice criteria and from the costs of interpersonal conflict and the thwarting of individual goals. In his experience with relief from conflict-based tension by following certain rules and criteria the individual’s adherence to them is strengthened and gains a certain amount of autonomy. Also, the moral teachings that advocate the prosocial transformations gain support from tension reduction. [In using conflict-based tension as a motivational state, the reduction of which is reinforcing, our analysis essentially follows that of Brown and Farber (1951) who identify a frustration-produced drive. | The Person as a Causal Agent. In Chapter 7 we emphasized the fact that transformation processes reduce the control of the given outcomes over the behavior of the person. Itis at this point in the causal sequence leading up to social behavior that the ‘‘person” appears, in fact and in an attributional sense, as a causal agent. The person who modifies his incentive conditions by producing a sharp transformation between the given and the effective matrix appears (to himself and others) as an active agent who, in part, governs his own behavior and limits its governance by the external environment and by his own drives and impulses. In short, he shows self-control of interests and self-regulation of action. In a special but real sense the transformation process is the juncture at which the person P becomes available for inclusion in Lewin’s famous formula, B = f(P, E): behavior is a function of the person and the environment. FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS Two of the implications of our analysis which have received little more than mention in the preceding chapters seem especially promising for further theoretical development. Levels of Interdependence The analysis of the transformation process reveals that people are interdependent not only at the level of the specific behaviors they enact but also at the level of the transformations they make of their given matrix; that is to say, a person’s outcomes will depend not only on his own transformations but on those of his partners. In certain given patterns, such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma, a person is ill-advised to adopt a jointwelfare orientation to the relationship unless he is assured that the partner will do likewise. This points to a more general phenomenon, that people are interdependent with respect to the general characteristics and attitudes they display in a relationship. From the internalization of social and personal values (as promoted by the functional utility of the transformational process) they gain rewards and incur costs not only from their own and their partner’s behavior but also from the kind of person they are able to “be” in the interaction and the kind of person they find the partner to be. Persons are similarly interdependent in the norm and role preference and propensities they bring to their relationships. The events at these higher levels of interdependence are constituted of real or perceived patterns of organization of events at the specific behavioral level. A person reveals that he has a particular attitude or personal characteristic by some consistency in his behavioral patterning. Thus “considerateness” is revealed by frequent acquiescence to the partner’s conflicting interests. Similarly, his adoption of a particular norm for the relationship (e.g., his sex-derived right to precedence in instances of interest conflict) is revealed by a behavior pattern consistent with that norm (such as frequent preemption in Chicken-like patterns; persistence in overriding the partner’s expressed preferences; advocacy of the same pattern for other males). Thus the higher levels of interdependence are linked to the behavioral level by the processes of attribution and selfpresentation. This gives rise to what is probably a common kind of conflict having to do with whether a particular behavioral event is to be considered as having more general significance. A common form of this conflict, described as ‘attributional conflict’ by Orvis, Kelley, and Butler (1976), appears to be that in which the enactor of a negative behavior believes it is to be taken only as a special instance and is not to be generalized from, whereas the partner is inclined to draw broad inferences from the event (the actor is a bad person or has negative attitudes toward the partner). The conception of levels of interdependence deserves further thought. It seems reasonable to assume that interdependence can be described in the same terms at both the specific behavioral level and at the more abstract or general levels. (It will certainly be convenient, conceptually, if this proves to be the case.) Thus the basic interdependence components seem applicable to the level of personal characteristics, each person having RC-type preferences for how.he himself appears, FC-type preferences for what the partner is like as a person, and BC-type preferences for combining the two (the latter corresponding to ideal models of person pairing). The central problems in developing the notion of levels of interdependence have to do with identifying the major levels and determining the dynamic relations among them. This will require a great expansion in our current understanding of the real and perceived organization of interpersonal behavior. Functional Accounts of Motivation The functional analysis underlying our conception of the transformational process points to some of the major components of social motivation (types of choice criterion and rules for social behavior) and their origin in the requirements of social interdependence. As briefly mentioned in Chapter 7, it seems likely to us that a more extensive analysis of this sort can be brought to bear on such phenomena as “unequivocal behavioral orientation,’’ cognitive dissonance, reactance, competence, and social comparison. We have continued to be uneasy about the ad hoc invocation or postulation of such motives and tendencies as a means of defining areas of research or of solving social psychological problems (cf. Thibaut and Kelley, 1959,-pp. 5, 116, 132). The major difficulties with this approach as we see it, are ambiguity about the ultimate “‘list” from which such tendencies are drawn and unclarity about the interrelations among the various tendencies (relative potency, domains of applicability, and so on). Thus it is difficult to see how motivational theory in social psychology can ever evolve from an ad hoc set of compartmentalized research topics into a coherent and inclusive set of interconnected principles. It seems to us now to be possible to derive many of the qualitative variations in motivation from quantitative analysis of the structure of problems and especially from social interdependence problems. Our analysis in Chapter 7 merely scratches the surface of the rich possibilities. We focus on the rules and norms required by certain interpersonal relationships, but we take for granted many of the more basic motives and behavioral tendencies that these and other of life’s problems require the individual to have. A primary requirement for all problems, impersonal as well as interpersonal, is that the individual be attentive to his environment and concerned about its causal structure. A realistic sense of own causal efficacy versus own dependence and helplessness is an essential aspect of one’s causal knowledge. It is also usually essential to take account of the future and to plan ahead. Our analysis has taken for granted these basic necessities as they are reflected in the importance of paying attention to the partner’s outcomes and future reactions to present events and in the necessity of expressing own needs and interests so that the partner’s causal analysis of the relationship can also have some basic degree of veridicality. Few, or perhaps none, of these requirements are absolute. Most or all are contingent on circumstances, nature of the problem, and interdependence. We believe the same can be said of the kinds of motive and tendency mentioned at the outset—that they have a common functional utility but are always inappropriate for some of life’s situations. Our suggestion, then, is that attempts be made along the lines of functionalistic analysis to categorize both interpersonal and impersonal problems and to derive their implications for the dispositional and motivational repertory of the well-adapted person. An analysis of this sort will provide us with a sense of the total set of such tendencies, insights into their interrelations, and understanding of their contingent utility. This will, we believe, provide a framework within which order can be brought to the current plethora of arbitrary and disconnected motivational assumptions within social and personality psychology. It will also, as an incidental but important result, provide ways of dealing systematically with questions regarding the elements in a behavioral and motivational repertory that are spurious, maladaptive, and abnormal. Perhaps most important will be the ultimate relevance of this analysis to evaluating the quality of people’s adaptation to their past, present, and future worlds. It seems clear that when there are massive changes in the distribution and locus of types of problematic situation and relationship the typical person’s motives and tendencies are likely to become sharply inappropriate. For example, as social interdependence increases, as coordination problems assume greater importance than exchange problems, and as diminishing resources heighten the general level of noncorrespondence of outcomes, the once appropriate mixtures of cooperative and competitive tendencies and their associated rules for contingent application may become highly maladaptive. A description of the changing nature of interdependence and an analysis of its behavioral implications seem necessary if man’s rate of adaptation is to keep pace with the rate of change in his world’s requirements.

