# Preface

Preface

Nearly two decades ago we published a book (Thibaut & Kelley, 1959) on

the social psychology of groups. That book, along with rather similar ones

by Homans and by Blau, has been incorporated into a tradition that has

come to be called social exchange theory. Although we are pleased to be

identified with such distinguished company, we cannot let the terminology pass without demurrer on two counts. First, our book did not

pretend to develop a theory and, second, we were concerned with much

more than social exchange. What the book did intend to present was a

conceptual framework for the analysis of problems of interdependence in

small groups—questions of attraction to the group, power and control,

status evaluations, social norms, coalition formation, and the like. Ina

subsequent smaller work (Kelley and Thibaut, 1969) we extended the

analysis to deal with informational interdependence, specifically as it

applies to group problem solving.

The present book represents our joint work over the last decade. When

we began it our aim was to revise our earlier book by reviews of empirical

studies since 1959 that would illustrate, elaborate, justify, or perhaps

prove troublesome for our conceptual framework. Relevant research was

abundant and for a while we proceeded with the revision. But in that

process new ideas occurred to us and as they gradually developed they

captured our interest. We set aside the plan for revision and decided to

write a new theoretical book. In this book, beginning with some key ideas

in the earlier work, a further and more systematic analysis of interdependence in two- and three-person groups is developed. It constitutes,

then, not a revision of The Social Psychology of Groups but a companion

volume.

This book presents a taxonomy of patterns of interdependence, a

set of indices for evaluating their properties, and an analysis of their

psychological antecedents and of the ways in which they become transformed by personal values and policies. Processes of attribution and

self-presentation are analyzed in the context of interdependent actions in

the group. Finally, a fresh conceptualization is proposed for the process

PREFACE

