# Subject Index

Subject Index, 339

| sHeyaeks ban, afealeyal

i An

Sale Yo

’ th

«ft

fa:

» ea

LSoabriag

‘cep

Py dni

“te ai j

ab ¢

i<.

ao)

apeih lve

gals

“oy

ely,

He erage

“ie wy

eps)

ee. bol Soe eens lt

2/6.

-0G>

Interpersonal

Relations

| aye

i an

lecoermeqieint. i

enialigio |

Introduction and

Overview

The Concepts of Interdependence as Developed in Thibaut and Kelley (1959), 5

An Illustrative Analysis of the Relationship, 7

The Status of the Matrix in Our Earlier Work, 13

A Theory of the Effective Matrix, 14

The Given Matrix and the Effective Matrix, 16

The Transformation Process, 17

The Functions of the Transformation Process, 20

The Logical Analysis, 23

Abstracts of Chapters, 25

Rafe

Sard

Weel!

scomwligrcny

plevggyi] > nhicton er

oo.

ol! oo showin ds

eS juts @ ape 1

I}?

The interdependence matrix for a dyad describes the way in which the

two persons control each other’s outcomes in the course of their interaction. It is constituted by specifying the behaviors important to the

relationship that each of them may enact and by assessing the consequences for both persons of all possible combinations of their respective

behaviors. Thus each cell in the matrix defines a possible interpersonal

event. The flow of their relationship can be described in terms of the

sequence of particular cells through which it moves.

The interdependence matrix plays a pivotal role in the analysis and

understanding of the dyad. On the one hand, it reflects the various ways

in which psychological and situational factors impinge on the pair. The

pattern of interdependence summarizes the consequences for the pair of

the abilities, needs, and evaluative criteria each person brings to the dyad

as well as the manner in which these two sets of personal dispositions

engage with each other. The pattern is similarly indicative of the external

resources at their disposal and of the task and environmental constraints

within which they operate. On the other hand, the interdependence

matrix describes the joint and individual problems the two persons face in

their relationship and certain of the means available to them for solving

these problems. Thus the matrix portrays the kinds and degrees of power

they have over each other by means of outcome control and the bases they

have for influence through threats, appeals to social norms, and other

communications. These aspects of the pattern have implications for

whatever interaction process, norms, and roles will develop if the two

persons achieve a stable and satisfactory relationship or, if they fail

to do so, the nature of the conflict that will characterize its dissolution.

In short, the interdependence matrix is an exceedingly useful conceptual device for moving from the psychological and situational bases

of interpersonal relations fo the processes and structures characteristic

of successful relationships and the conflict and disruption in the unsuccessful.

The nature of the interdependent relationship is not always fully or

accurately understood by the participants. Furthermore, even when it is

fully and accurately assessed, the outcome matrix does not always indicate unequivocally the course of action to be taken. However, although

we must keep these caveats in mind, this simple and obvious pointis to be

emphasized:

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

If a person knows (or thinks he knows) the contingent relations between

his own and his partner’s actions, on the one hand, and his own outcomes, on the other, he has a basis for deciding what to do himself and/or

what to attempt to induce the partner to do in order to affect his own

outcomes beneficially.

The outcome matrix determines the experiences that the interdependent persons will have in the course of their interaction. Depending

on the actions they take, whatever the reasons for them, the outcome

matrix specifies what the consequences will be for each of them. Consequently the outcome matrix affects what they might learn from their

interaction.

The possible ‘learnings’ are quite varied, including, for example,

specific individual actions, joint and coordinated action, preaction communication, and understandings of the contingencies themselves. Thus a

given outcome matrix affords the basis for learning to perform, automatically and without thought, a certain action in a specific situation. For

recurrent interdependence situations people acquire social habits that

enable them to act without analysis and decision. A set of different

outcome matrices, representing different contingencies, affords the basis

for discrimination learning—learning to vary one’s behavior in ways

appropriate to different social settings. Also, singly and together, the

outcome matrices provide the basis for cognitive learning—for developing an understanding of the types of pattern and the logical relations

among them and an insight into the problems they pose for the relationship.

It must be emphasized, though, that when two persons are placed ina

given interdependence relationship (as in an experiment) their respective

actions and their interaction may not be predictable from the properties of

that relationship. One or both may misunderstand their interdependence

and therefore make inappropriate decisions and one or both may respond

with an inappropriate habit. (The children’s game “Simon Says” would

be an example of the latter). In the long run, if the inappropriate decision

or habit is not deadly, we would expect it to be replaced by one more

appropriate. Thus we expect behaviour to be moderately appropriate to

the interdependence problem of the moment. The learning tasks here

however, are exceedingly complex and difficult, the discriminations to be

made are subtle and manifold, and the concepts to be formed are complicated and closely interrelated. Mistakes are to be expected, particularly

for the inexperienced and for those whose experience has been restricted

to special settings.

It is our working assumption, then, that the total set of outcome matINTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

rices—those correctly and those incorrectly understood—account for all

of social behavior. They account for everything that is or can be learned

about social interdependence. Thus in their total effect they are responsible for both the successes and the failures in social interaction—the

successes when a specific matrix is recognized for what it really is and is

responded to in its own terms and the failures when a matrix is defined

and responded to incorrectly. The opposite side of the coin is that any

specific matrix bears only an imperfect relation to the behavior associated

with it. As already described, the behavior occurring in relation to any

particular matrix may have little to do with the particular contingencies

represented there. In short, when considered as the total set, outcome

matrices provide a complete account of social behavior. No single one of

them, however, is the sole determinant of action within it.

This book is an analysis of outcome matrices (interdependence matrices). It considers their possible patterns, their antecedents, the problems they pose in relation to their properties, how they can be thought

about and provide bases for decisions, and what they make it possible to

learn about social life.

THE CONCEPTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE AS DEVELOPED IN

THIBAUT AND KELLEY (1959)

To provide a background for our present formulation of a theory of

interdependence it seems useful to begin with an outline of the principal

concepts that were used in our earlier treatment of the topic (Thibaut and

Kelley, 1959) and that serve as the starting point for our present work. To

give substance to the meaning and utility of these concepts we choose to

begin with a story of courtship and marriage which we subsequently

analyze by reference to the concepts presented in the 1959 book. The story

is that of Marya and Sergey in Tolstoy’s short novel Family Happiness

(Tolstoy, 1940). We sketch the main episodes in their relationship.

The story is related by Marya, who is 17 when she falls in love with

Sergey, a bachelor in his late thirties who lives on a neighboring estate in

the country some distance from St. Petersburg. Sergey has loved Marya

for a long time and is overwhelmed with joy that she has come to love

him. They are married and there is perfect family happiness. Marya

describes her feelings:

The mere sight of him made everything begin to speak and press for

admittance to my heart, filling it with happiness.

.. Now I could see what

he meant by saying that to live for others was the only true happiness, and I

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

agreed with him perfectly. I believed that our life together would be endlessly happy and untroubled. I looked forward, not to foreign tours or

fashionable society or display, but to a quite different scene—a quiet family

life in the country, with constant recognition in all things of the hand of

Providence.

. his plans for our future life together were just my plans,

only more clearly and better expressed in his words.

Blissful months passed and winter came. There were changes that gradually slipped into Marya’s feelings.

. in spite of his company, I began to feel lonely, that life was repeating

itself, that there was nothing new either in him or in myself, and that we

were merely going back to what had been before.

A new and disquieting sensation began to creep into my heart. To love him was not

enough for me after the happiness I had felt in falling in love. I wanted

movement and not a calm course of existence. ... I felt in myself a

superabundance of energy which found no outlet in our quiet life.

In spite of strong efforts to conceal her feelings Marya’s discontent and

the basis for it are plainly evident to Sergey. He talks with her about her

unhappiness and finally proposes that they spend three months—from

Christmas to Easter—in St. Petersburg to attend the theater and ballet and

to introduce Marya into society. Sergey has misgivings about this venture

and hopes that Marya will reject it. She has had no experience with the

city or with society and the idea resonates with her growing need for

excitement. They arrive in the city just before Christmas.

From the start nothing has ever been so wonderful for Marya.

I found myself at once in such a new and delightful world, surrounded by so

many pleasures and confronted by such novel interests, that I instantly,

though unconsciously, turned my back on past life and its plans. ‘All that

was preparatory, a mere playing at life; but here is the real thing! And there

is the future too!” Such were my thoughts. The restlessness and symptoms

of depression which had troubled me at home vanished at once and

entirely, as if by magic. My love for my husband grew calmer.

| could

not doubt his love; every thought of mine was understood at once, every

feeling shared.

lalso began to realize that he not only loved me but was

proud of me.

And Sergey was proud of her, at least for awhile.

Months pass, Easter has gone by and Marya has given herself over to

society and to her commitments there, totally enchanted by this glittering

life. Sergey observes all of this from the wings; he has gone from boredom

to irritation and finally to intermittent jealousy and anger. Marya does not

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

return to the country and, apart from visits to supervise his estate, Sergey

remains with her in the city. He holds steadfast in his love for her and in

his committed support for all her activities; but he figures only peripherally in her life. Marya:

. | was constantly in society where I did not need him.

. My whole

day, from late in the morning till late at night, was taken up by the claims of

society; even if I stayed at home, my time was not my own. This no longer

seemed to me either gay or dull, but it seemed that so, and not otherwise, it

always had to be.

Three years pass in this way, mechanically. Neither Marya nor Sergey

makes any serious move to change their relationship. A son is born and

Marya loves him, though it is Sergey who spends time with him. Still,

nothing seems to be altered.

A summer is spent at Baden, where a goodly

sample of fashionable people from the capitals of Europe are foregathered. Here occurs a series of events that causes Marya to feel the

futility and emptiness of her life. In this international setting she is

outshone and humiliated and she is revolted by the competition for social’

leadership. Moreover, when she is aggressively courted by an Italian

marquis, toward whom she is both primitively attracted and repelled, she

becomes frightened by her own feelings and by the thought that she had

come so dangerously near to casting her husband and child out of her life.

She is overwhelmed with self-disgust. The near-loss of Sergey and her

son makes her want to see them very much.

Marya and Sergey return to the country. A second son is born. Nothing

much happens, but Marya is ready for a surcease from excitement. The

novel ends with a touching scene between Sergey and Marya who is

fondling the infant son.

That day ended the romance of our marriage; the old feeling became a

precious irrecoverable remembrance, but a new feeling of love for my

children and the father of my children laid the foundation of a new life anda

quite different happiness; and that life and happiness have lasted to the

present time.

An Illustrative Analysis of the Relationship

We now introduce the main concepts of the Thibaut—Kelley framework

through their application to the story of Marya and Sergey as they move

through the vicissitudes of their relationship.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Outcomes.

The outcomes for any participant in an ongoing interaction

can be stated in terms of the rewards received and the costs incurred by

the participant, where these values depend on the behaviors produced by

the two persons. For some purposes rewards and costs are treated separately, but typically we have assumed that they can be combined into a

single scale of ‘“goodness”’ of outcome. By rewards we refer to whatever

gives pleasure and gratification to the person. Costs refer to factors that

inhibit or deter the performance of any behavior

or segment of

behavior—factors such as physical or mental effort or pain, embarrassment or anxiety, and the arousal of conflicting forces or competing

response tendencies of any sort. The magnitudes of the rewards and costs

experienced by the dyadic members will depend on their needs and

values, their skills and abilities in performing the behaviors, and the

congruency of the behaviors or behavioral products with their needs and

values. Satiation reduces rewards and fatigue increases costs.

In the story of Marya and Sergey the rewards in the early phases of their

marriage were based on their need and ability to give love and affection

and to receive it. Each found happiness in “living for’ the other and

happiness in being “‘lived for.’” Moreover, their beliefs about the good life

and their projects for the future of their lives together were mutually

supportive—“his plans .

. were just my plans.” For Marya, however,

some of these rewards gradually lessened because there was nothing

new. Later, in the city, Marya’s rewards came not so much from Sergey as

from the excitement of being a beautiful woman in an admiring society,

but at the end (though it is only briefly sketched) it was again Sergey who

became the source of her deepest and best rewards.

At the beginning of their marriage costs were few. They came from the

brief periods of separation when Sergey was occupied with the business

of the estate—interludes when the demands of the estate competed with

their desire to be together. Later, in St. Petersburg, Marya’s involvement

in society imposed heavy costs on Sergey who would rather have

returned to their life in the country but felt obliged to endure a place and a

role that he disliked. Still later, during the summer in Baden, it was

Marya—humilated,

anxious, and frightened—who experienced the

heavy costs.

Evaluation of Outcomes.

In evaluating the adequacy of their relationship,

the members of a dyad need some kind of standard for gauging the

acceptability of the outcomes they receive from it. Two kinds of standard

for making such an evaluation have been identified—the comparison

level (CL) and the comparison level for alternatives (CL,),). The CL is the

standard against which the participant evaluates the “attractiveness” of

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

the relationship or how satisfactory it is. This is the standard that reflects

the quality of outcomes that the participant feels he or she deserves.

Outcomes falling above CL are experienced as relatively satisfying and

those below CL are unsatisfactory. The location of CL on the person’s

scale of outcomes is determined by all the outcomes known to the

member, either by direct experience or by observation of others. The

more attainable an outcome, the heavier it will be weighted in forming the

The CL,;, can be defined informally as the lowest level of outcomes a

member will accept in the light of available alternative opportunities in

other relationships. So defined, it follows that if outcomes drop below

CL, the participant will leave the relationship. The location of CL,),

depends mainly on the quality of the most attractive of the alternative

relationships readily available to the participant. As outcomes in a relationship exceed CL,,, by larger and larger degrees the participant becomes

progressively more dependent on the relationship as the unique source of

his experiences. [For a fuller discussion of CL and CL,;, see Thibaut and

Kelley (1959), Chapters 6 (especially), 7, 10, and 12. ]

The effects of CL on outcome evaluation were particularly striking for

Marya. The intense and novel joys of courtship, falling in love, and the

honeymoon weeks established a high CL that the ensuing routines of a

country household could not equal. ‘To love him was not enough for me

after the happiness I had felt in falling inlove.’’ The dissatisfactions that she

then revealed to Sergey led him to arrange their sojourn in the city, where

a new range of experience for Marya seemed all the more marvelous

against the standard of her provincial background. The sheer excitement

she felt about her life in society gradually subsided partly (it may be

imagined) because satiation set in and partly because her CL rose as it

incorporated her recent experiences. “This no longer seerned to me either

gay or dull.”

As far as we know from Tolstoy neither Marya nor Sergey made any

serious effort to break off their relationship. They lived together even

through the three years in St. Petersburg, although Marya’s dependence

on Sergey was sharply reduced: “I was constantly in society where I did

not need him.’”” We may guess that, in some degree at least, Marya

remained with Sergey because of the high costs of exit (disapproval from

kinfolk, friends, church, and the wider society, feelings of guilt about

broken obligations, and the hurt to Sergey). These exit costs would serve

to depress CL,,. Attractive alternative relationships were certainly available to her. But perhaps it was the totality of them and her life with all of

that, rather than any other single person, that was attractive to her.

When, in Baden, one particular alternative relationship with the Italian

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

marquis was made obtrusively available, she balked and fled—back to her

husband and child. It was as though, when her commitment was tested

and the irreversible decision was faced, she understood or remembered

how much her future happiness depended on them.

Matrix concepts.

The device we have used to represent the various patterns of interdependence in relationships is the outcome matrix. In the

simple form in which it is illustrated here the matrix has two columns and

two rows. (See Figure 1.1.) The two columns distinguish two mutually

exclusive behaviors or behavioral segments (@, and a.) that person A can

enact and the two rows distinguish two behaviors (b, and b,) that B can

enact. Each of the four cells then represents the intersection or joint

occurrence of one of A’s behaviors and one of B’s behaviors. In each of the

four cells the number placed above the diagonal indicates the outcome

that A receives, whereas the number below the diagonal indicates B’s

outcome. Thus, in the relationship summarized in Figure 1.1, if personA

enacts a, while B is enacting b,, A receives an outcome of 0 and B an

outcome of 2.

Person A

Person B

Figure 1.1

[llustration of the 2x2 matrix.

The degree to which outcomes exceed CL,,, determines how greatly the

person depends on the dyad for favorable outcomes. Accordingly, the

numbers entered in the outcome matrix are usually scaled from CL,), as

the zero point. The entries in the matrix indicate the degree to which each

person is dependent on the dyad, and the pattern of entries thus represents their pattern of interdependence. Each member’s dependence

constitutes the basis for the other member’s power. Thus A’s power over

B is defined as the range of outcomes through which A can move B, this

range being the distance between B’s CL,,, and the best outcomes A can

produce for him.

There are two broad kinds of power. The first we have called fate

control (FC). If, by varying his or her behavior, person A can affect B’s

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

outcomes regardless of what B does, A has fate control over B. If each has

this kind of power, the pattern is one of mutual fate control (MFC). To

illustrate this pattern of MFC from the story of Marya and Sergey consider

the earliest phase of their marriage. Each wanted above all to give love

and consideration to the other; each willingly gave and each happily

received “constant mutual love.’”” Figure 1.2 represents this mutually

benevolent relationship. When both “give much,” both receive their best

outcomes and their outcomes are always higher than if the other chose to

“give little.’ Thus the choice of each affects the other’s happiness. (Each

also derives pleasure from “giving much” to the other; as we show later,

this matrix also involves bilateral reflexive control.) The possibility of

giving little, which would yield low outcomes to both, no doubt has such

low salience that it would scarcely be considered.

Marya

Gives

Gives

much

little

Gives

much

Sergey

Gives

little

Figure 1.2

Illustration of mutually

benevolent relationship with fate control.

A second kind of power is called behavior control (BC). If, by varying

his or her behavior,

A can make it desirable for B to vary his or her

behavior also, then A has behavior control over B. If each has this kind of

power, the pattern is one of mutual behavior control (MBC). The behavior

of each is conditional on that of the other and coordination of behavior

becomes important. In Tolstoy’s story Marya speaks of her happiness at

the beginning of the marriage that ‘his plans .

. were just my plans.”

The agreement on a plan was in itself gratifying. Suppose that two plans

had been discussed. Sergey’s announcement that he liked plan X would

have brought Marya to instant accord. She would even have been happy

to agree on plan Y and so would Sergey, but neither would have

espoused either plan if the other had espoused a different plan. Figure 1.3

shows this pattern of mutual behavior control.

The patterns of interdependence shown in Figures 1.2 and 1.3 reflect

the harmony of the early stages of the relationship between Marya and

Sergey. Their outcomes are correspondent: they are positively correlated

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Figure 1.3

Illustration of mutual behavior

control.

over the cells of the matrix. What is good for one is good for the other and

what is bad is bad for both. They share a common fate. As the story

unfolds conflicts began to develop between Marya and Sergey. In the city

Marya’s commitments to society involved her so exclusively that little was

left to give Sergey, who nonetheless “holds steadfast.” The pattern of

MFC represented in Figure 1.2 then becomes that of Figure 1.4, as

Marya’s interests shift away from preoccupation with Sergey. Marya’s

commitments led her to prefer to give little to Sergey, from whom she

continued to receive support for all her activities. Conceivably, Sergey

could have threatened also to “give little,’” but as one can see from Figure

1.4 this action would have been quite painful to carry out. The pattern in

Figure 1.4 is no longer harmonious: a strong element of outcome noncorrespondence has entered.

Marya

Gives

Gives

much

little

Gives

much

Sergey

Gives

little

Figure 1.4

Illustration of noncorrespondent

relationship with mutual fate control.

Noncorrespondence can also occur, of course, in patterns of mutual

behavior control. Suppose that Marya’s alienation from Sergey had

developed much further. She preferred life in society and he, life in the

country. But whatever Sergey did he would have strongly preferred to

share with Marya, whereas she would much rather have lived without

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

him. As in Figure 1.5 his best outcome would have occurred if they had

lived together in the country and hers would have occurred in society

unaccompanied by him. The outcomes of each would have been highly

contingent on the other’s behavior and noncorrespondently so. [For a

more extended discussion of these concepts see Thibaut and Kelley

(1959), Chapters 3, 4, 7 (especially), 9, and 10. ]

Marya

Life in

Life in

society

the country

Life in

society

Sergey

Life in

the country

Figure 1.5

Illustration of noncorrespondent relationship with mutual behavior control.

The Status of the Matrix in Our Earlier Work

The view presented in our earlier book took the matrix as being useful in

two different ways. For some purposes we assumed that the matrix

describes the subjective understandings and anticipations of the possible

interactions and outcomes, however inadequately they may represent

the actual universe of possibilities. Thus employed, the matrix describes

the individual orientations of the participants. For other purposes, and

more generally, the matrix was intended to be used in the objective sense

that the values in the cells reflect the actually experienced outcomes when

the joint behaviors are engaged in. This use of the matrix thus represents

the joint interests of the dyad as a unit. In its subjective form the matrix

was Said to afford opportunities to make short-run predictions about

what behaviors will be performed and whether exploration of the matrix

will continue. When the matrix represents the objectively available outcomes (the experiences potentially attainable in the relationship), it could

be used to make long-term predictions about the viability of the dyad and,

under certain conditions, the behaviors most likely to occur. In its objective form the matrix was intended to have two other closely related uses.

It may serve as a bench mark against which to evaluate the degree to

which, at any stage in its development, the dyad is realizing the outcomes

potentially available, and it may be used prescriptively to make recomINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

mendations about the joint behaviors that ought to be performed in the

interests of the relationship.

Thus we were aspiring to use the matrix for predicting behavior in the

dyad. The subjective matrix was thought to be useful in making short-run

predictions about exploratory behavior in the early formative stages of the

relationship. The objective matrix was suggested to provide the basis for

long-run predictions about patterns of behavior and likelihood of viability

of the relationship. Taken together, the two forms of the matrix would

then constitute the effective matrix from which behavior in the dyad could

be predicted.

A THEORY OF THE EFFECTIVE MATRIX

In revising and extending the analysis made in 1959, several avenues of

development are open. In an effort to improve the prediction of behavior

in interdependent relationships one might be tempted to adopt a psychometric approach. The alternative courses of action persons perceive as

available to themselves and to others could be determined and the anticipated consequences of various joint enactments could be measured on

preference or utility scales. These assessments and measurements would

be used to predict the first response after measurement that each person

makes to the situation and, possibly, the first steps of their interaction.

This psychometric approach is part of the strategy adopted by Wyer

(1969). Immediately before interacting pairs of unacquainted subjects

were asked to fill out a questionnaire that assessed each subject’s preference (or utilities) for various combinations of outcomes for himself and

his partner. The dyads then proceeded to interact for 50 trials in one of 12

different matrices. The preference judgments taken from the questionnaire responses were used to transform the raw matrix values given

to each pair of subjects. These transformed values generated predictions

of dyadic behavior that were, in general, quite good and (at least somewhat) superior to those that could be made with the raw matrix values.

Rather than adopting the psychometric approach, we present here a

theory about the antecedents of the outcome matrix that is effective at the

time the behavior occurs—the matrix that is the most immediate determinant of the behavior. To the degree that the theory is correct, comprehensive, and operationalizable, it becomes possible to predict the

effective matrix from facts about the participants and their situation. The

dyadic behavior itself can then be predicted from knowledge of the

effective matrix.

A valid theory of the antecedents of the effective matrix avoids the

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

inefficiencies inherent in the psychometric approach, which stem from

the necessity of making ad hoc assessments of each situation and each

sample of subjects before predicting the behavioral consequences. Such a

theory probably also provides a better basis for predicting the longer

course or flow of the interaction between interdependent persons. It is

likely to imply how the matrix will change as a function of the events of

the interaction. At the very least it specifies processes and factors entering

into the matrix that are subject to influence and alteration by the interaction itself.

The problems involved in identifying the antecedents of the effective

matrix are essentially social-psychological in nature and have to do with

analyzing the products of social learning—the acquisition of social values

and the development of beliefs about social structures and causes of social

behavior. Although some of these phenomena have been studied outside

social psychology (especially in developmental psychology), their systematic delineation and analysis would seem to be the responsibility of

social psychology and not likely to present themselves as problems to

other areas of psychology.

There were two main considerations that convinced us of the importance of confronting these problems of the origins of the effective matrix.

One major impetus to our decision came from our dissatisfaction with

simplistic experimentation in which the matrix defined by the experimenter was naively assumed to be the effective one. Not only is this

assumption erroneous on the basis of everyday observation of individual

and cultural differences in what constitutes an incentive but there is much

research evidence for its invalidity. The work of McClintock and Messick

and their colleagues (e.g., McClintock and McNeel, 1967; Messick and

Thorngate, 1967) demonstrates that behavioral choices in response to

given matrix values are highly variable across subjects and indeed may be

interpreted as measures of the strength of differing social motives. Contextual influences, for example, the subject’s comparison level created by

the prior level of his outcomes, have also been shown to affect the

subject’s response

to given matrix values (Friedland, Arnold, and

Thibaut, 1974). Raw matrix values are simply not satisfactory predictors

of behavior.

The second consideration that impelled us to work toward a theory of

the effective matrix was our concern that the potentialities of outcome

matrices have been underestimated and widely misunderstood. The writings of social psychologists abound in references to the narrowly hedonistic assumptions inherent in the use of interdependence matrices and in

assertions that such prosocial motives as altruism, cooperation, and the

desire for justice are precluded from and inconsistent with an analysis

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

based on these matrices. Our disagreement with the foregoing position is

expressed in our theory of the effective matrix.

The Given Matrix and the Effective Matrix

The effective matrix, as we now construe it, summarizes the set of

behavior—-outcome contingencies that are operative at the time the

behavior occurs. Decisions to act involve choices among the alternatives

as defined in the effective matrix and are made with respect to the outcomes indicated therein. The postbehavioral assessment of consequences

of action are also made with respect to the outcomes in the effective matrix.

(There are, however, as we argue later, some limits to the participants’

exclusive preoccupation with the effective matrix.) In short, action is both

taken and evaluated with respect to the outcomes in the effective matrix.

It is possible to distinguish two sets of factors or processes that contribute to the effective matrix. These operate successively in time, the

second set acting on the products of the first. The distinction is facilitated

by representing the first products in a given matrix. Thus we distinguish

(a) a set of causal factors that generates a given matrix from (b) a set of

processes elicited by the pattern of that matrix and acting to redefine it.

The result of this redefinition is the effective matrix.

For introductory purposes we propose to suggest the meaning of the

given matrix by offering an illustration—the experimenter’s game matrix.

The experimenter specifies response choices and, in terms of kinds and

quantities of incentive, the consequences of various combinations of

choice. The local value of each consequence (points, pennies) depends, of

course, on the properties of the players. These properties include their

needs and concerns, what these lead them to regard as important, their

general comparison levels that affect the scaling of the consequences,

their marginal utilities, depending on recent deprivation of or satiation

with a given incentive, fatigue accumulated through effort required to

enact behaviors, and skills determining the costs incurred. The local

consequences of interpersonal interferences and facilitation effects are

also represented in the given matrix.

In general, as in the foregoing illustration, the given matrix is determined by environmental factors and institutional arrangements in combination with personal factors (needs, skills, etc.). The matrix is “given’’

in the sense that the behavioral choices and the outcomes are strongly

under the control of factors external to the interdependence relationship itself.

The outcome in each cell of the matrix—each intersecting or joint

behavior—is given for the relationship by virtue of the specifications of the

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

social and physical environment and the relevant properties of the two

persons.

There is no close causal nexus between the given matrix and the

behavior it elicits. As we have already observed and as we show more

extensively in Chapter 7, outcomes defined locally, cell by cell, as in the

given matrix, do not account for behavior in interdependent relationships.

What the actors often do react to is the pattern of the given matrix; for

example, to the disparity between their own and the outcome of the other

ina given cell, to the fact that both outcomes are high in certain cells, or to

the possibilities of alternating between differentially preferred cells. In

effect, by responding to aspects of pattern in the given matrix the actors

transform it into a new matrix, the effective one, which is then closely linked

to their behavior.

It is to call special attention to this transformation process that we

distinguish the given from the effective matrix. The chain of causal events

leading to the effective matrix can, we think, be broken to distinguish (a)

processes generating a pattern of outcomes, each outcome caused locally,

without reference to the others, from (b) processes elicited by that pattern

(hence specific to it) and acting on it. This is shown in Figure 1.6 in which

the arrows at (a) refer to the processes by which each outcome is independently determined and the arrow at (b) refers to the process of recognizing patterns of outcomes and transforming them, that is, the transformation process.

Antecedents

Given matrix

Effective matrix

Environment

Person A

Behavior

Person B

Figure 1.6

The antecedents of the effective matrix.

THE TRANSFORMATION PROCESS

This generates a reformulation or reconceptualization of the matrix with

respect to the behavioral choices it affords and to the consequences of

various actions. The process works with the facts summarized in the given

matrix; for example, consider Matrix I in Figure 1.7. Assuming that the

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

NE ES

Matrix I

Matrix II

Matrix III

Figure 1.7

Illustration of the transformation process.

interaction is to occur on repeated occasions, the behavioral choices for

the two persons may be redefined in the following terms:

Person A:

(1) always choose 4,

(2) always choose a»,

(3) alternate between a, and a,

Person B:

(1) always choose b,

(2) always choose b,

For the redefined choices (consisting of policies about courses of action

over many occasions) the outcomes can be stated as in Matrix II in Figure

1.7 (the entries being average outcomes per trial). The redefinition of the

choices generates a new set of outcomes for the pair, a set in which each

person gets something and both get the same outcome. Intuitively, it

seems clear that although agreement about what to do would be difficult

or impossible in the given matrix (Matrix I) it might well be possible in

Matrix II. This intuition reflects the fact that certain common social values

are available as a basis for agreement in II. Thus A might be heard to say

“Don’t be foolish and act so that neither of us gets anything,” andB might

be heard to reply, “That seems reasonable as long as you make it possible

for us to share and share alike.” This conversation, invoking in simple

terms the social values of common welfare and justice, reflects the possibility of applying criteria of choice in the matrix (in this case, II) other than

those having to do so simply with own outcomes. Consider the extreme

case in which each person sets aside his concern exclusively with his own

outcomes and focuses instead on two criteria of choice: (a) the total

outcomes to the pair and (b) the difference between their respective

outcomes. If each person treats the first as a positive criterion (something

to be attained and maximized) and the second as a negative criterion

(something to be avoided), then Matrix II is transformed to become Matrix

Il.

In contrast to the originalgiven matrix (I) Matrix III provides a clear basis

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

for agreement between the pair. If each could have assumed that both

would reconceptualize Matrix I in this manner, explicit agreement would

not even have been necessary: each would have known what to do and

what the partner would do by virtue of the implicit recognition of their

common interest.

Matrix III, which exemplifies the effective matrix, results from two

successive reformulations of Matrix I: (a) a redefinition of the choices and

(b) a shifting of evaluative criteria. The transformation process may

involve either or both. These particular transformations change the pattern from one of conflict to one of common interest. Other transformations would have different effects; for example, the relationship

could be made more competitive tHan originally defined. Whereas the

transformations illustrated above serve the common interest (if made

jointly), others serve just one person’s interests. As we shall see, some

given relationships (described as ‘“mixed motive’) can be transformed

either in ways relating to prosocial goals and values or to exploitative

purposes and selfish interests.

The concept of ‘transformation process” affords a way of describing

important social determinants of behavior (social values and sociotemporal organization of behavior) and of moving from the level of specific

behavior to more complex social phenomena such as the interplay of

different orientations to social interaction and systems of rules, roles, and

norms. The separation of the analysis of antecedents of the effective matrix

into pattern—independent and pattern—dependent processes brings into

special focus the effects of pattern per se on behavior. This is an especially

appropriate focus for social psychology inasmuch as it deals with the

social and temporal organization of behavior and the application of

social-value criteria to behavioral decision making.

The theme of the transformation process is ‘taking account of broad

considerations.” Rather than being viewed locally, outcomes are considered in the contexts provided by the matrix pattern and by the past and

future. The “transforming” person is not content with the matrix as given

but introduces additional considerations, such as his outcomes in relation

to those of his partner and the outcomes he can attain over a long time

span. Outcomes are not reacted to one by one and in isolation. They are

compared and cumulated. Working within the context of the given matrix,

the person sees what he can do with it—by planning, reevaluation, and

reconceptualization. Note that the transformation process does not

involve any direct intervention to change the structure of the given matrix.

Direct intervention to alter its design is always possible, of course, and

would be analogous at the macrosocial level to a distinctive, and perhaps

revolutionary, change in the socioeconomic system. Here we are addressINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

ing a process that is logically and psychologically antecedent to such a

possibility—a process of alterations in the cognitive and axiological significance of the given matrix.

The transformation process is precluded by limited information. If the

person has too little information to detect the pattern of the matrix, he

cannot respond to it in a pattern—dependent way; for example, he may

not know what the other’s responses are (or how many of them there are)

nor the other’s outcomes. In this case he would have difficulty ascertaining properties of the pattern. This suggests one approach to a

study of the transformation processes. By varying the amount of information given the actors the Sper gee of these processes can be encouraged or discouraged.

The transformation process is subject to change if it is not “working.”

Ordinarily people are not unconditionally altruistic or just. The “success”

of any given transformation depends on what the partner does; for

example, a turntaking sequence is practical only if the partner reciprocates. In the absence of reciprocation a different sequential policy will

be adopted. The susceptibility of the transformation process to change

according to its consequences raises the question of the learning of the

components of this process. We now turn to this topic. The general

assumption here is that the given matrix is, historically and developmentally, the site in which social values and social intentions (plans,

rules, and roles) are learned.

The Functions of the Transformation Process

Referring to the example in Figure 1.7, we can see that the actions

indicated by the transformed matrix (III) serve not only to yield high

outcomes as defined there but also good outcomes to both persons in the

given matrix. This suggests the first important function of transformations

and a probable basis for their acquisition. Action within given matrices is

often unsatisfactory for one or both persons; for example, if in the wellknown Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG), shown in Figure 1.8, each

person independently acts in the way that is best for himself, that is, if

each chooses his second response, the joint consequence is that both

persons

receive

outcomes.

appropriate

mutual

reconceptualization of the interdependence problem, afforded by the transformation process, provides a basis for joint action (a, b,) that is more

satisfying to both persons even when evaluated in terms of the given matrix. In

this case one such transformation involves the choice criterion of maximizing their joint score (the sum in each cell), as shown in Figure 1.8.

A second function of transformations is that they provide a basis for

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

Given

Effective

Figure 1.8

The Prisoner's Dilemma game and a possible transformation.

individual action in relation to certain given matrices in which no basis

exists; for example, in the given pattern in Figure 1.9 (a pattern of simple

mutual fate control) neither A nor B has a basis in his own outcomes for

deciding what to do. With an outcome transformation that attaches

positive value to their joint score each has a reason for choosing his first

response. In the transformed matrix 4, and b, are better than their respective alternatives, regardless of what the partner selects.

Given

Effective

Li,

Figure 1.9

Mutual fate control and a possible transformation.

Certain given matrices do not require transformation. For these matrices there exists neither of the above reasons for (functions to be served

by) transformation. Each person has a basis for action and actions taken

on these bases yield satisfactory outcomes. This does not mean that such

patterns will not be transformed, for example, as part of some larger

“game” or by inappropriate response to their pattern.

Because of the functions they serve, it is reasonable to assume that

transformations may be learned. The reinforcement for their acquisition

has been implied: (a) over the long run they improve the individual’s

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

given outcomes and (b) they afford a basis for action. The latter may be

assumed to be reinforcing via conflict avoidance mechanisms, cost avoidance by avoiding time loss, and/or provision of “unequivocal

behavioral orientation” (Jones and Gerard, 1967).

This assumption that the transformational processes are learned raises

a number of interrelated questions for analysis and research. For each

possible given pattern what is possible and likely to be learned? Considering the probable distribution of his experience over the set of possible patterns, what set of transformational tendencies would we expect a

person to learn? On what bases does a person learn to discriminate

different patterns and contingently apply different transformations?

How do the preexisting transformational tendencies of his various

partners influence what a person learns? Their tendencies will affect his

experience with various approaches to various patterns. His learning

does not take place in interaction with equally naive partners. We must

consider the ‘cultural transmission’’ of transformational tendencies via

experience in interaction. (We leave it to others to deal with the “direct”

transmission of these tendencies, via moral teaching, propaganda, and so

on.)

These transformational tendencies are represented in the mature adult

as social and personal values and as rules for good and/or successful

social conduct. These values and rules may be prosocial, egoistical, or

even antisocial in nature. It is reasonable to assume that because of their

functional value these tendencies are acquired not only as instrumentally

useful procedures and rules of thumb but also, by association with a

broad spectrum of gratifications, as qualities of value themselves. One

way of describing this process is in terms of functional autonomy: these

tendencies acquire a “life of their own,” an independence of their original

learning conditions; for example, justice becomes a value to be served

without respect to its consequences for the self. Indeed the outcomes

evaluated according to the criterion of justice (e.g., minimized difference)

may become the only ones operative for the individual. Choices may be

based on them, without reference, before or after the act, to own given

outcomes.

Functional autonomy, however, is rarely absolute. It seems unreasonable to us to assume that the transformation tendencies ever become

completely independent of their functional utility. There are several

reasons for this. The tendencies are many in number, often somewhat

contradictory, and (at least ideally) learned in conditional rather than

absolute terms. In order to obtain good given outcomes, a person cannot

always invoke a particular value, such as justice. He must do so conditionally, depending on the situation and the partner. Indeed, from the

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

point of view of good given outcomes, some situations require the opposite (maximizing the degree to which own outcomes surpass the other’s).

If we assume that the person learns a repertory of transformational

tendencies and their conditional application, it seems hardly likely that

any one of them will be applied, even to specific situations, without

regard to its consequences and without some openness to the different

consequences of alternative transformations.

In general, it seems likely to us that the untransformed outcomes in the

given matrix have, in some final or ultimate way, an impact on the

interaction. They cannot, forever and completely, be disregarded even if

only because certain of them are basic to the individual’s biological survival. This is not to deny that a well-socialized, morally mature person

can set aside his own outcomes and act according to purely moral and

social considerations with great consistency over long periods of time.

However, we find it difficult not to believe that at some level he keeps an

account of the consequences of such action for his own personal welfare

(i.e., in terms of outcomes in the given matrix). [In this connection our

analysis shows that the functionally valuable transformations may all

have self-interest (own outcomes) represented in them to some degree (as

in the foregoing examples). There is no given matrix for which the purely

altruistic choice criterion of maximizing other’s outcomes is more beneficial than the criterion of maximizing joint outcomes. |

THE LOGICAL ANALYSIS

Itis possible to identify the major types of matrix pattern systematically. It

is further possible to analyze the effect on the various patterns of (a) a set

of simple mathematical operations and (b) a set of simple sequences of the

behavioral choices. Thus we can develop information of the sort shown in

Figure 1.10, specifying for each possible pattern X the patterns X,, Xo, X3,

and so on, that are generated by applying the various mathematical

operations and sequential rules, singly and in combinations, to pattern

The relation of this logical analysis to the model of the antecedents of

the effective matrix (Figure 1.6) is apparent: X corresponds to the given

matrix and pattern X, to the effective matrix. The mathematical operations

and sequential rules correspond to two important aspects of the transformation process—respectively, the outcome transformations and the

sequential transformations.

To facilitate this analysis it is first necessary to examine closely the

properties of matrices themselves. Mathematically, the effects of the

mathematical operations and sequential rules depend in systematic ways

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Pattern

Pattern

Pattern

Pattern

Figure 1.10

Logical analysis of the transformations.

on the properties of the initial pattern. Also the ‘‘necessity’”’ for transformation and the ‘‘success’’ of any given transformation depend on

certain properties of the matrices concerned (the given and the effective

matrices). Finally, the analysis of the pattern of the given matrix suggests a

set of specific questions with respect to its antecedents. These are some of

the topics to be considered in subsequent chapters of this book, as

outlined in the following section.

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

ABSTRACTS OF CHAPTERS

In order to provide a convenient overview of the topics in this book and

their sequential development, the abstracts that precede each of the

chapters are presented here.

Chapter 2

The Components of Interdependence

This chapter presents an analysis of the basic components that underlie

the pattern of any outcome matrix. The analysis is applicable to both given

and effective matrices. These components represent, for each person, his

direct control over his own outcomes (reflexive control), the direct control

over his outcomes by his partner (fate control), and the two persons’ joint

control over his outcomes (behavior control). The resultant pattern of a

matrix depends on how these components fit together (described in terms

of correspondence and concordance) and on their relative magnitudes

(weights).

Chapter 3 Antecedents of the Given Matrix

This chapter presents a social psychological analysis of the antecedents,

both environmental and personal, of the given matrix. The analysis is

made in terms of the antecedents of the components, the relations in

which they stand to each other (their correspondence—noncorrespondence

and concordance-discordance), and their relative magnitudes. It also

provides a new perspective on the old problems of similarity, complementarity, and compatibility.

Chapter 4

The Domain of 2 x2 Matrices

This chapter considers the various possible patterns of the simplest matrix (the 2 x 2) and the principal properties of the total domain of such

matrices. They are classified with respect to four properties: (a) mutuality

of dependence, (b) degree of dependence, (c) bases of dependence, and

(d) correspondence of outcomes. Variations in the last property, which

reflects commonality versus conflict of interest, are shown to depend in

important ways on combinations of the first three properties. Various

important patterns and common “games” are identified and located

within the domain and in relation to one another. Although it is not

possible to consider every possible matrix, the analysis of matrices into

components (as described in Chapter 2) and the relation of these comINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

ponents to properties of the domain give confidence in the comprehensiveness of the exploration.

Chapter 5 Properties and Indices of Interdependence Patterns

This chapter proposes indices

for the major properties of interdependence patterns and describes how they are related to the components of interdependence. This provides a systematic analysis of what

was done intuitively in Chapter 4; namely, a delineation of the links

between the properties of the matrix, on the one hand, and the components and their interrelations that underlie it, on the other. The analysis is also propaedeutic to those in Chapters 6 and 7, which show how

the properties of the given matrix govern the necessity for transformations

to be made and how the properties of the effective matrix depend jointly on

the components of the given matrix and the particular transformations

made.

The analysis of the bases of correspondence-noncorrespondence reveals the factors underlying the two persons’ control over their joint

outcomes and over the difference between their respective outcomes,

which have implications for the discussion of the bargaining process

in Chapter 10. Last, we give systematic attention to questions raised

in Chapter 4 concerning the particular combinations of components

and their weights necessary for optimal versions of various matrix

games.

Chapter 6 Logical Analysis of the Transformation Process

This chapter examines the shifts in matrix pattern generated by applying various mathematical operations and sequential rules to certain

given patterns. Only certain plausible transformations, corresponding to

common values and temporal concepts, are investigated. These include cases in which the person (a) gives some direct weight to his

partner’s outcomes in his decision-making criteria (outcome transformations), (b) attempts to be the first or second to act on a given occasion

out of regard for how the choices are changed for the second actor

(transpositional transformations), and (c) adopts a policy governing

his successive choices over a series of interactions in the given matrix

(sequential transformations). The several transformations are analyzed

for the effect they have on the patterns of interdependence and

therefore on such things as the components of the pattern, the correspondence or noncorrespondence of outcomes, and each person’s basis

for choice.

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

Chapter 7 Origin and Evocation of Transformations

This chapter considers the factors that are broadly responsible for the

occurrence of transformations. At the outset an analysis is made of the

functional value of the transformations described in Chapter 6 as applied

to the salient patterns of interdependence identified in Chapter 4. This

analysis identifies the functional bases for learning to make, under certain

conditions, particular transformations for particular patterns of the given

matrix. A subsequent section briefly considers the conceptual problems

associated with interpreting behavior as providing evidence of transformations. We then discuss the evidence bearing on situational factors

that evoke or elicit various types of transformation. A brief review is made

of evidence pertaining to the existence of individual differences in transformational tendencies. A final section points to the general theory of

self-regulation of motivation that is implied by the present special theory

of transformations in contexts of social interdependence.

Chapter 8 Processes of Attribution and Self-Presentation

This chapter analyzes the processes by which the dyadic members learn

the nature of the given matrix and the transformations that are being

applied to it. In discussing these processes, account is taken of the cues

presented by each member and the resulting attributions made about the

nature of the relationship. Ina concluding section the analysis is extended

to show how self-presentational and attributional processes operate in

the development of trust and intimacy and in the escalation of conflict.

Chapter 9 Interdependence in Triads

An analysis is made of the components of triadic interdependence. This

analysis provides the basis for a discussion of the third person’s possible

effects on the dyad—how the dyad can be strengthened, changed, or

disrupted by a representative of the social environment. Attention is then

focused on the consequences for the third person of the dyad’s behavior,

viewed in terms of the power of the dyad over the “outsider.” In final

sections consideration is given to full-blown, three-way interdependence

with special emphasis on some phenomena unique to the triad (relative to

the dyad).

Chapter 10

Negotiation and Coalition Formation

This chapter first presents a model of independent and joint action in the

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

dyad that identifies the framework within which negotiation between the

members can occur. This framework consists of the various bargaining

positions that may be available to the two persons and the settlement

points that are viable in relation to the bargaining positions. A distinction

is made between two types of bargaining position: (a) those created by

each person simply pursuing his own interests and (b) those created

explicitly, as threats, for the purpose of imposing on the other person a

settlement favorable to the bargainer. The model is then extended to the

triad where it forms the basis for an analysis of coalition formation—an

analysis of which pair of the three persons, if any, will act in concert

against the third. The bases for coalition formation exist in the mutual

benefits to the coalition members of working together to create bargaining

positions of the two types noted. The possibilities of coalition action are

shown to increase the number of possible process and outcome patterns

in the triad, compared with the dyad.

Chapter 11

Epilogue

This chapter provides a brief interpretive commentary on the theoretical

ideas presented in this book. An outline of the kind of theory developed

here lists its essential points. Some historical notes relate our central

assumptions and orienting ideas to those of Kurt Lewin. A final section

highlights several further lines of development of the present theoretical

approach.

The Components

of Interdependence

The Analysis of Interdependence,

The General Level of Outcomes: The Grand Mean Component,

Alternative Analyses of Interdependence,

Alternative Mathematical Analyses: Decompositions,

Mathematical versus Social Psychological Analysis,

Analysis of the Given versus the Effective Matrix,

Purposes of the Mathematical Analysis,

Some Formal Considerations,

ve Teal

an oye 9 ae

> oe

ne au is

ene Ch edrg? bape

real

toyed Repent

wt Se val |

eared gaged):

ee ke

rie? Vath, gine ve beth

wit aires an, > wilh 1, vaayt

veh. bene munetiad fai Ma at oy

1y pechiasacale ag ;

ABSTRACT

This chapter presents an analysis of the basic components that underlie the pattern

of any outcome matrix. The analysis is applicable to both given and effective

matrices. These components represent, for each person, his direct control over his

own outcomes (reflexive control), the direct control over his outcomes by his

partner (fate control), and the two persons’ joint control over his outcomes

(behavior control). The resultant pattern of a matrix depends on how these

components fit together (described in terms of correspondence and concordance)

and on their relative magnitudes (weights).

Person A’s control over person B’s outcomes may be absolute or contingent. In the first case, by simply varying what he does, A can produce a

variation in B’s outcomes. We have described this as fate control (FC)

because A has absolute control over B’s fate (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). In

the second case A’s effect on B’s outcomes is contingent on what B does;

therefore they jointly affect B’s outcomes. We have described this as

behavior control (BC) because when A varies his behavior he makes it

desirable for B to vary his also (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). All dyadic

relationships characterized by interdependence are based on A’s fate

control and/or behavior control over B and B’s fate control and/or

behavior control over A. These four elements reflect, respectively, four

basic sets of evaluations: (a) B’s evaluations of A’s actions, (b) B’s evaluations of their joint activities, (c) A’s evaluations of B’s actions, and (d) A’s

evaluations of their joint activities. Interdependence exists in the relationship only if B has differential evaluations (i.e., preferences) in one or

both of these respects and if the same is true for

A. If only A or B have such

preferences, the relation is one of unilateral dependence rather than

mutual dependence (interdependence).

Two further sets of evaluations play an important role in the pattern of

interdependence; namely, each person’s differential evaluations of his

own behaviors. We refer to them as his reflexive control (RC) because as the

person varies his actions he has an effect back upon himself affecting his

own outcomes. These evaluations have no direct relation to the degree of

interdependence but markedly affect the manner in which it is expressed

and is likely to be dealt with.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

These six sets of differential evaluations, essential to the characterization of any pattern of interdependence, may be conveniently summarized by three matrices, one showing the bilateral reflexive control (BRC)

component of the relationship, a second showing the mutual fate control

(MFC) component, and a third showing the mutual behavior control (MBC)

component; for example, Figure 2.1 shows particular matrices for the

three components and the relationship that, in combination, they constitute. Figure 2.1 might reflect the particular facet of a husband and wife

relationship that concerns their activities at 5:30 in the evening when he

arrives home from work. Each has two salient options: to have a cocktail

or to go bicycling. The four cells in the matrix represent the four possible

combinations of their respective behaviors, including the cases in which

they have cocktails together and go cycling together and also those in

which one drinks while the other cycles. The number in the upper-right

portion of each cell indicates the wife’s outcome for that particular event

and the number in the lower-left portion, the husband’s outcome. The

higher the number, the greater the satisfaction the indicated person

derives from that combination of their behaviors.

The BRC component in Figure 2.1 shows that drinking is preferred by

the husband as an activity for himself and cycling is preferred (and

somewhat more strongly so) by the wife for herself. The MFC component

reveals that the wife prefers that, other things being equal, the husband

go bicycling. Perhaps she regards it as the healthier thing for him to do; it

makes her feel comfortable about his well being. Finally, the MBC component shows that both prefer doing the same activity to doing different

ones. Both prefer that they do whatever they do at the same time, as

might reflect the satisfactions they gain from undertaking such activities

together. The overall pattern of their interdependence with regard to

these activities represents a simple summation of the components; the

values in each position of the resultant matrix at the right are derived by

simply adding up the three values in the corresponding positions of the

component matrices.

Wife

Cycling Drinking

RS RS

Bilateral reflexive

Mutual fate

Mutual behavior

Resultant

control

control

control

Figure 2.1

Components of hypothetical husband and wife relationship.

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

Thus the resultant relationship, the overall pattern of interdependence,

consists of the three components. More properly, it may consist of three

components because one may have only zero entries (or the same value in

all cells) reflecting a lack of differential evaluation in one or more of the six

respects listed. For the relationship to be considered one of interdependence it is necessary that there be variation over the outcome

entries for each person in either the MFC component, the MBC component, or both. Within a given component there may be asymmetry

between the two persons. This is illustrated in both the BRC and MFC

components of Figure 2.1. The latter component shows that although the

husband’s choice exercises fate control over the wife he has no preference

about what she does (except as she does things in conjunction with his

own activities—reflected in the MBC matrix). Strictly speaking, there is

no mutual fate control in Figure 2.1. However, we use the label “mutual

fate control’’ to refer to the component matrix whatever the values occurring there.

Figure 2.1 also illustrates another important property of the components: they may differ in magnitude. It is clear that in this particular

part of our hypothetical husband and wife relationship the most important facts are their own preferences about what they themselves do. If we

imagine how the two might make their decisions in this situation, the

greater magnitude of the evaluative differentiations reflected in the BRC

component, relative to those in other components, suggests that this

husband and wife will probably be guided by these simple, asocial

preferences, each tending to go his own way, she on her Schwinn and he

in his Martini.

If our hypothetical pair consistently follows the dictates of its respective

reflexive controls, the consequences will be that neither will ever gain the

highest levels of satisfaction possible for him or her in this portion of their

relationship. Thus the wife will never have the pleasure of her husband’s

company and the sense of reassurance

from his healthful activity that

would be possible if they both went cycling together. Similarly, he will

never know the delight of her conversation over a drink. To putit another

way, if each one is to achieve the highest level of outcome available in this

part of their relationship, the other one must make do, at least on that

occasion, with rather low outcomes.

This last feature of our example points to an important property of the

pattern of interdependence, namely the degree of correspondence versus

noncorrespondence between the two persons’ outcomes in the various

cells. This property determines in crucial ways the problems created for

the persons by their interdependence and the process likely to characterize their interaction. The reader will appreciate intuitively the sigINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

nificance of correspondence versus noncorrespondence by realizing that

it summarizes how similar or compatible the two persons are and determines how cooperative or competitive their relationship is likely to be.

The comments in the preceding paragraph reflect the degree of noncorrespondence of outcomes in the resultant matrix for our husband and

wife, a degree partially described by noting that it is not possible for both

to attain their maximum outcomes at the same time.

Now let us consider a slight variation in our example. Figure 2.2

presents the same three components as Figure 2.1 but the MBC component is differently oriented. In Figure 2.2 the husband’s and wife’s

evaluations of their joint activities have shifted so that rather than both

preferring to do one or the other together both prefer different ones. This

might be the case, for example, if, on the one hand, she simply cannot

stand to watch him drink and he is embarrassed if she does; on the other

hand, their joint cycling activities are also somehow mutually unsatisfactory. The result of this different set of preferences is to produce an

MBC component more in accord with the dominant BRC component of

the relationship; that is, their mutual desire to engage in separate activities coincides with their “reflexive’”’ preferences for different activities.

The net effect is to generate a pattern characterized by a higher degree of

correspondence of outcomes. In contrast to Figure 2.1 the resultant in

Figure 2.2 permits the husband and wife to gain their respective highest

levels of satisfaction at the same time.

Wife

Cycling Drinking

BRERA

Bilateral reflexive

Mutual fate

Mutual behavior

Resultant

control

control

control

Figure 2.2

Same relationship as in Figure 2.1 but with MBC concordant with BRC.

This example indicates that the pattern of the interdependence

depends not only on the three components and their relative magnitudes

(to be referred to as weights) but also on their positioning in relation to

one another—how they mesh together. We refer to this meshing by the

terms concordant and discordant. The MBC and BRC components are

concordant in Figure 2.2 and discordant in Figure 2.1. In a similar manner

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

the MFC may be concordant with the MBC when, for example, in their

exercise of fate control in a manner favorable to each other’s outcome,

they also satisfy one of the coordination requirements in the MBC pattern. A discordant relation would exist between MFC and MBC when the

actions reflecting mutually benevolent use of fate control converge on

cells that are mutually low in the MBC matrix.

Further, BRC may be concordant or discordant with the MFC component—concordant if it is consistent with a person’s exercising his fate

control in a manner favorable to the other person and discordant if it is

consistent with his using fate control to the opposite effect. In our

example the husband’s RC is discordant with his FC over his wife. As he

pursues his own immediate preferences (regarding his own actions) he

takes the action less favorable to her. Now it becomes plain why BRC,

although having nothing directly to do withinterdependence, is an essential ingredient in our analysis. It is in its possible concordant or discordant

relations with MFC and MBC that the BRC component affects the pattern

of interdependence and thereby the course of the relationship. This is a

formal way of expressing the simple fact that the individual’s preferences

about his own actions affect the manner in which he takes (or is tempted

to take) those actions and his exercise of both fate and behavior control

over his partner.

final

factor

contributes

to the

overall

degree

of correspondence—namely,

the correspondence

or noncorrespondence

within the MBC component itself. Our examples have included only

highly correspondent MBC components, but the reader can imagine

cases of noncorrespondence; for example, the wife might prefer doing

things together as in Figure 2.1 but the husband might prefer separate

activities as in Figure 2.2. As we shall see, intermediate degrees of correspondence in the MBC component reflect the fact of different strengths

of preferences between the two persons in regard to their joint behaviors.

The MFC and BRC components do not vary in degree of correspondence.

The two sets of entries in each of these matrices vary independently (in the

language of mathematics they are orthogonal); so the degree of correspondence (or of noncorrespondence) within the component matrices

is always zero.

THE ANALYSIS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

The examples in the preceding section show how we can construct or

synthesize various interpersonal relationships. Given certain examples of

each component matrix, we can synthesize the resultant relationship by

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

adding the components together. Let us now consider the opposite

procedure in which, given a resultant matrix, we analyze it to determine

what its components are and how they fit together.

The analysis of rectangular arrangements of numbers such as our

outcome matrices is made possible by a procedure derived from what is

known in statistics as the analysis of variance. We take for an example a

relationship investigated experimentally by Guyer and Rapoport (1970)

and described by them as a “‘threat-vulnerable game.” We refer to it

simply as a threat game. As shown in Figure 2.3, the relation is asymmetrical. The interaction tends to be one in which A acts as a kind of

‘allocator’ of the outcomes in the relationship (by shifting back and forth

betweena, anda, while B doesb,) andB acts asa “‘threatener,” threatening

to use his ability to reduce their joint outcomes (as ata2b2) toinduce A to be

fair in his allocation.

Figure 2.3.

Threat game used by Guyer and

Rapoport.

The analysis of the relationship in the threat game can be illustrated by

first considering only B’s outcomes and determining what components

contribute to variation in them. Figure 2.4 shows how this analysis is

conducted. As a first step the averages are determined for each row and

column and are shown arrayed around the total matrix at the left. These

averages are then compared to determine how much reflexive control B

exercises in this relationship. Because his average outcome for b, is 14.0

and for b, 6.5, his reflexive control is 7.5, the difference between these

values. This is indicated by placing 7.5 in each upper cell of the RC

component (inasmuch as), is the more valued action) and 0 in each lower

cell. Similarly, A’s fate control over B is determined by comparing the two

averages beneath the game matrix. The difference (17.5 — 3.0 = 14.5)

indicates how much, on the average, B prefers a; to a, and this fact is

appropriately indicated in the FC component. This reflects the degree to

which B is subject to fate control by A’s actions. Finally, although A’s

behavior control over B can be calculated directly, like the first two

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

AS SRE

Threat game

B’s RC

Bs FC

B's BC

Weights: RC, = +7.5

FC, = +14.5

BC, = —2.5

Figure 2.4

Analysis of components of variation in B’s outcomes in the threat game.

components, it is most readily determined as a difference by subtracting

RC + FC from the original matrix; that is, for each cell in the BC component we calculate what value must be entered there if the three component values are to add up to the total value. In cell a,b, of the BC

component in our example there must be —2.0 in order for the components (7.5 + 14.5 — 2.0) to summate to 20. If the arithmetic is done

correctly, all the rows and columns in the BC component will yield the

same total (in the example, —1.5).

Below each component matrix in Figure 2.4 we have indicated B’s

weight for that component. This ‘component weight” simply indicates

the magnitude of the difference in B’s outcomes produced by each source

of control. Thus B’s FC weight (FC,) of 14.5 indicates that he is subject to

fate control to the extent of 14.5 units. These weights are given algebraic

signs to indicate whether B’s outcomes are higher in the upper left (@,b,)

cell (indicated by a positive sign) or not (indicated by a negative sign).

Thus B’s RC and FC weights have positive signs because in both cases his

high component values occur in the a,b, cell. His BC weight (BCs), calculated by taking the difference between his high and low values in the

MBC component matrix, is given a negative sign because his lower

outcome occurs in the a,b, cell. The BC, weight of —2.5 summarizes the

fact that as far as the BC component is concerned B’s outcomes are 2.5

units higher in the a,b, and a,b, cells than in the a,b, and a,b, cells.

Following this procedure, we can also analyze the sources of variation

in A’s outcomes and, putting this analysis together with that of B, we

have the complete analysis of the threat game into its components, as

shown in Figure 2.5. Each person’s component weights, with appropriate

signs, are shown below each component matrix.

The essential properties of this relationship are revealed by the analysis.

A and B have more control over each other’s outcomes than over their

own; that is, they have more fate control than reflexive control. The

essence of their interdependence is MFC; the bit of MBC is relatively

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Threat game

Weights: RC, = —6.5

E@ = st .3

BC, = +1.5

RC, = +7.5

FC, = +14.5

BC, = —2.5

Figure 2.5

Complete analysis for both A’s and B’s outcomes in the threat game.

unimportant. (The small degree of MBC present in the relationship is

characterized by noncorrespondence. The reader will note that this fact is

indicated both by the pattern in the component matrix and by the opposite signs of BC, and BC.) Additionally, B’s RC is concordant with his FC

over A but A’s RC is discordant with his FC over B; that is, B’s RC tends to

induce him to take the action that A prefers, whereas A’s RC tends to

induce him to take the action B does not prefer. (The reader will note

that these facts are not only represented in the matrices but are also

reflected in the signs of the weights: RC; has the same sign as FC,, which

is the FC that B exercises over A; and RC, has the opposite sign from FC z,

which is the FC that A exercies over B.) This combination of concordance

and discordance creates the essential properties of the relationship, B

tending to the action that is to their mutual advantage and A tending to

take the one that is to his own advantage (and to B’s disadvantage). The

latter creates the situation in which B may have to take his “threat action”

(b.) in an attempt to induce A to perform, at least sometimes, action 4).

Action b, is properly called a threat action because B must incur some loss

himself in order to reduce A’s outcomes. Thus b, is something B would

rather not do but that he probably will do if he must in order to influence A.

The analysis of a pattern of interdependence made in the manner just

outlined has an important property: it provides a unique analysis for every

pattern. Given a specific pattern of interdependence, the analysis shows

us (a) the relative values each person places on his own actions, the

other’s actions, and their joint actions, (b) the nature of the concordances

among the sets of preferences, and (c) the degree of correspondence or

noncorrespondence within the MBC component. Thus all the ingredients

that go to make up the total relationship are revealed in a precise and

unique manner. (However, for a qualification of the uniqueness point see

page 42.) Furthermore, the analysis is applicable to every matrix of any

size—not only 2 x 2, but 3 x 3 matrices, 5 x 2 matrices, and so on.

Important for the consideration of groups larger than dyads is the fact that

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

the analysis also works for 2 x 2 x 2 and higher order matrices. As we

show in Chapter 9, however, the number of components increases

sharply with the number of persons involved in the interdependence.

This discussion can be summarized by a theoretical statement: all

patterns of dyadic interdependence can be viewed as resultants or compounds of the three components BRC, MFC, and MBC. This assertion has

analytic and synthetic implications. Analytically, any given pattern of

interdependence can be analyzed into a unique set of three component

matrices. The analysis reveals the three component weights for each

person and how the various types of control fit together (i.e., their

concordant-discordant

and correspondent—noncorrespondent

relations). Synthetically, from different combinations of the three component

matrices all possible patterns of interdependence can be constructed. In

Chapter 4 we employ the synthetic implication of the analysis to explore

the domain of possible patterns and to note the salient types.

THE GENERAL LEVEL OF OUTCOMES:

THE GRAND MEAN COMPONENT

In our analyses of matrices so far we have not considered one important

property of the matrix, namely, the general level of its outcomes. The

most complete way to characterize a resultant matrix is in terms of four

sets of values: the magnitude of the BRC, MFC, and MBC components

and the two grand means. The magnitudes of the grand means have been

concealed by the procedures we have considered so far because they are

buried in the pairs of values by which we have chosen to show the BRC,

MFC, and MBC components. The grand means are revealed if we use the

particular method of analysis shown in Figure 2.6. The pattern, an asymmetrical one, consists of BRC, MFC, and MBC. When the three components are represented by symmetric positive and negative values, as in

Figure 2.6, a final matrix with a constant value for each person must be

Resultant

EIN EN

+6 NIL

= DS

RC, = +4

FC, = —2

Bey e= 6.7

GMa ="5

Figure 2.6

Analysis with grand mean included.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

added to account for the resultant matrix. These values are the grand

means for each person—28/4 or 7 for person A and 20/4 or 5 for person B

in our example. (The calculations are easiest if the grand mean or GM

matrix is first determined directly from the averages and the MBC component is found by subtraction in the last step of the analysis.)

The significance of the grand means for the two persons dependson what

the matrix represents. In the usual case the matrix describes behavioral

choices the two persons make within their relationship (as in the example

of the husband’s and wife’s choices between drinking and cycling). The

grand means indicate in general how rewarding this portion of their

relationship is to them. If each person’s outcomes are scaled in relation to

his best alternatives (following our suggestion regarding the comparison

level for alternatives, Thibaut and Kelley, 1959), his grand mean reflects

the general satisfactoriness of this relationship, or the particular portion

of it, relative to other alternative relationships. Of course, the grand mean

reflects the average of all the person’s outcomes in the matrix. Depending

on the course of the interaction between the two persons, their average

experienced outcomes may be higher or lower than the grand means. The

latter reflect only the general level of possibilities in the situation summarized by the matrix.

In a different use of the matrix, one we have not illustrated so far, each

person’s choices are between being in a relationship with the particular

partner or being in some other social location. (A person whose choice to

be in this particular relationship is not reciprocated is, of course, left in an

uncomfortable limbo to which the alternative location is generally preferable.) In this case the grand means reflect each person’s general level of

outcomes derived from the particular sort of relationship with respect to

which the choices are being made. The outcomes might

be scaled according

to each person’s comparison level for such relationships (Thibaut and

Kelley, 1959), in which case the grand means would reflect overall satisfaction—dissatisfaction with this type of relationship.

A different example suggests another role of the grand means in

describing interdependence. Figure 2.7 presents three different versions

of ‘’Chicken,’”” a pattern consisting of MFC and MBC combined discordantly, the former being the more important of the two. This pattern

has taken its name from its alleged correspondence to the contest that

pairs of young men have been known to play with their automobiles,

racing toward each other at high speed down the center of a highway. The

one who first veers to one side in order to avoid a collision is identified as

being cowardly or ‘‘chicken.’”” In one important respect the patterns

reflect this situation: the riskier choice is also the one that enables a person

to beat the other. Thus, if A takes the risky choice (D) but B is unwilling to,

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

Resultant

(chicken)

Figure 2.7

Three versions of Chicken differing only in grand mean.

A clearly outstrips B in terms of payoff. Thus the relationship provides an

opportunity to demonstrate one’s willingness to take risk and to outshine

another person in this respect. However, another aspect of the real life

game of Chicken, the danger, is not well represented unless the grand

mean is very low. As shown in Figure 2.7, when the grand mean is high,

both persons at worst come out with nothing. Risk exists here only in the

sense of variance in possible gains and not in the sense of danger of loss.

The versions with negative grand means seem to be more appropriate

analogues to the real-life situation, the middle version being the best.

With a grand mean of —3 for each person, the relationship is one in

which, if both refuse to play the game (i.e., both play C), neither one wins

or loses anything. It is only as one insists on gaining some reward from

the situation and creates the possible loss for the other one that the

interaction runs the risk of leading to large losses for both.

In the comments above we are clearly assuming that the meaning of

variability in outcomes depends not only on its magnitude but also on

where, within some total range of outcomes, it occurs. Avoiding a loss (to

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

have a zero outcome rather than a —12) is usually different from making a

large gain rather then a small one (18 rather than 6). Similarly, to gain a

given amount from a zero level (0 to 10) is usually different psychologically from gaining the same amount from a high level (going from 30

to 40). We are referring to the relation between given and transformed

outcomes and recognizing the nonlinear function and the asymmetries

between positive and negative outcomes that sometimes characterize the

relation. We have more to say about these matters in Chapter 6.

ALTERNATIVE ANALYSES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

The foregoing procedure for the analysis of interdependence is recommended on the basis of the simplicity of its calculations and the vividness

with which it reveals the relative magnitudes of the several sources of

variation in the matrix. The analysis, however, is arbitrary in several ways

that we now discuss.

Alternative Mathematical Analyses: Decompositions

In our analysis of the matrix in Figure 2.4 we represent B’s reflexive

control of 7.5 units by entering 7.5 in each upper cell of the BRC component and 0 in each lower cell. To do so is arbitrary. We might, instead,

enter any pair of numbers in the two sets of cells as long as they differ by 7.5

units. Then, depending on the pair of values we use to represent the two

levels of RC, B’s values in the MFC and MBC components must be

adjusted accordingly.

This point is most readily illustrated by Pruitt’s study of decompositions of the Prisoner’s Dilemma game (1967). This game, shown in

the matrix in Figure 2.8, derives its name froma

story about two prisoners

who are being held in separate cells after their arrest for a major crime.

The evidence in the hands of the district attorney is such that they can be

convicted only if either one confesses to the crime. The choice of confessing is indicated by D in the matrix and the choice of remaining mum,

by C. The outcomes of 6 in the matrix specify the consequences of both

confessing and being convicted and the outcomes of 12, the consequences

of both being acquitted. If only one confesses, he is rewarded by being set

free and having a prior minor charge dropped (indicated by the value of

18). In this case the other one is convicted and given a more severe

sentence than if he too had turned state’s evidence (an outcome indicated

by the 0 payoff). Each prisoner faces the dilemma created by his realization that (a) regardless of what his partner does he himself is better

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

off confessing than maintaining silence, but (b) if both act according to the

logic of (a) they will be convicted, whereas with mutual silence they could

have been acquitted. (It is perhaps unfortunate that this relationship has

become so strongly associated with this particular story. As we shall see,

the pattern is characteristic of many types of ‘“exchange” relationship that

have nothing to do with crime or penalties.)

Pruitt had some subjects play the PDG shown in Figure 2.8 in its matrix

form (Game I). After both subjects had independently chosen C or D the

pair of choices was referred to the matrix to determine the outcome of

each. In other conditions the game was presented in one of the three

decomposed forms shown in Games II, III, and IV in Figure 2.8. The

consequences of the C and D choices were shown separately for the self

and for the partner and were reported back separately, each person

receiving an outcome after his own choice and again after his partner’s

choice. It can be seen that “your gains” represent the BRC component of

the PDG and “‘other’s gains,”” the MFC component. As shown in Figure

2.9, the three decomposed cases represent three different ways of specifying the BRC and MFC components, Game III corresponding to the

method of analysis we have already described. The reader will be able to

determine for himself that these are only three of an infinite variety of

ways of representing the BRC and MBC components. The only properties

that the three cases have in common (and that all such decompositions

must have) are (a) that the magnitudes of the differences reflecting degree

of reflexive and fate control are, respectively, 6 and 12, (b) that the BRC

and MFC components are oriented discordantly, and (c) that the values in

Game |

Your

Other's

Your

Other’s

Your

Other’s

gains = gains

gains

gains

gains

gains

Game II

Game III

Game IV

Figure 2.8

Pruitt’s Prisoner's Dilemma game in matrix form (Game I) and three

decomposed forms (Games II to IV).

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Ree Gae po

NINN ae

ac inet ells

VAVA

VAVE TAYE VA

Figure 2.9

Matrix representation of Pruitt’s three decompositions of the Prisoner's

Dilemma game.

the C,C cell add up to 12 for each person. The first two conditions mean

that all three cases in Figure 2.9 have the same component weights for the

two persons: RC, = RCg=—6; FC, = FCs =+12. The last condition,

together with the other two, ensures that all the cell values will add up to

those in the resultant matrix.

Pruitt’s decompositions make it clear that our analysis of the matrix

yields a solution that is unique in a special way. It is unique only with

respect to the magnitude of the differences between the values each

person places on his own two actions, on the partner’s two actions, or on

different combinations of their actions; that is to say, it is unique with

respect to the component weights for the two persons.

In Chapter 7 we consider the results from Pruitt’s studies which show

that the particular way in which the PD game is represented has large

effects on the resulting interactions. These results are not entirely surprising in view of the different emphases that the several decompositions

give to the cost versus reward aspects of the interchange; for example,

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

Game II highlights the cost that must be imposed on the partner if one is

to increase one’s own outcomes directly. In contrast, Game IV highlights

the necessity of incurring costs oneself if one is to increase the rewards

provided to the partner. Thus the different decompositions imply that

different psychological bases underlie the resultant patterns. The different bases of component and resultant matrices are considered at length

in Chapter 3.

Hamburger (1969) has described the patterns that are decomposable in

the manner followed by Pruitt as ‘‘separable games.” These are patterns

consisting only of BRC and MFC components. It should also be noted that

games with MBC components are subject to many different minimal—component analyses. Figure 2.10 shows three different analyses for

a pattern knownas

the Battle of the Sexes, which is composed of MFC and

MBC, the latter being the larger in magnitude and the two being meshed

discordantly. These different ways of thinking about the relationship

have not been studied empirically but it seems likely that they would

generate different patterns of interaction. They appear to emphasize

Resultant

Game II

NET iS

SANS

SSNS). SS.

NINO AN RIS

SN. QS...

NN RIN

Figure 2.10

Alternative analyses of the Battle of the Sexes.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

differentially the importance of helping (or avoiding hurting) the partner

and of achieving coordination (or of avoiding incoordination). For this

reason they are likely to produce different initial rates of C response and

different interpretations of the actions that are taken.

Mathematical versus Social Psychological Analysis

The comments in the preceding section are addressed to the alternative

simple mathematical analyses that can be made of a given interdependence matrix. Each of these analyses is the simplest possible in the

sense that only the minimally necessary set of components consisting of

MFC and/or MBC and possibly BRC, is involved. One implication of the

preceding discussion is that there are many such simplest analyses and

any arbitrary decision about which one to make may fail to represent the

analysis the participants make of their own relationship—the way they

separate out the issues and values it involves. The present section pursues the distinction between mathematical and social psychological analysis and raises the possibility that none of the alternative simple

mathematical analyses may reflect the psychological and social factors

underlying the pattern of interdependence. Therefore none of them may

capture the components as the participants think about them.

Consider the example shown in Figure 2.11 which might characterize

Mathematical analysis

ces |

Husband

PNEX

Social psychological analysis

Saag

Resultant

Costs of cleaning

Negative value of

Costs of

cleaning alone

not cleaning

Figure 2.11

A comparison of mathematical and social-psychological analysis of the

cleaning example.

COMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

the relationship between a young husband and wife in regard to their

doing various cleaning chores around their apartment. Let us say that

each weekend the choice of each one is between cleaning or not and the

consequences are as indicated in the matrix. The mathematical analysis

shows that the interdependence involves only two components, BRC and

MFC, the latter being more important than the former and the two being

meshed in a discordant manner. Each person prefers slightly not to clean

and strongly to have the partner clean. (Reference to the preceding

section will show that we are again dealing with the Prisoner’s Dilemma

game.)

An hypothetical social psychological analysis of the relationship is

presented in the lower portion of Figure 2.11. This is what might be

revealed by asking the couple about the cleaning chores: how much effort

it takes to do them alone and together, how each one feels about it if he or

she cleans and the spouse does not, and how uncomfortable it is to let the

cleaning go altogether. Alternatively, these outcomes might be inferred

from a job analysis of the cleaning chores, which might indicate how

much mutual interference they involve, and from attitude scales assessing opinions and values about tidiness and fairness. The analysis in

Figure 2.11 indicates that the modest costs of doing the cleaning are

shareable if both do it, that each one suffers sizable additional costs when

he or she does the cleaning alone (e.g., through feelings of inequity), and

that the costs of not having the cleaning done at all are even higher.

Several points can be made by reference to this example: (a) the components in the social psychological analysis are themselves complex

matrices which can be analyzed into mathematically simpler components. In fact, each of the three components in the lower portion of

Figure 2.11 is a mixture of BRC, MFC, and MBC (cf. Figure 2.12). (b) We

have identified three social psychological components in this particular

example, but in practice the empirical analysis of, any given interdependence pattern might yield any number of such components. This is

in contrast to the mathematical analysis that always yields at most the

three components (four, if we include GM). (c) Most important of all, the

example in Figure 2.11 suggests that the mathematical analysis may not

always be useful for understanding the actual elements or components

that go to make up certain relationships as they exist in real life. These

natural elements are likely themselves to be complex mixtures of BRC,

MFC, and MBC. Certainly, when people report to us the factors that

underly their interdependence, they are not likely to have them sorted

out into the three minimally necessary mathematical terms.

We have more to say about the social-psychological components of

interdependence in Chapter 3, in which we consider the antecedents of

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the given matrix. Further, in Chapters 6 and 7, in which we analyze the

process by which the given matrix is transformed into the effective one, we

consider how persons may focus selectively on one psychological aspect

of the relationship or another (similar to those shown in the lower portion of Figure 2.11), depending on their current intentions and preoccupations.

Analysis of the Given versus the Effective Matrix

The reader may wonder at this point which of the matrices has been

subjected to mathematical analysis, the given or the effective. The answer is

that we may analyze one or both, depending on our purposes. We

certainly want to analyze and classify interdependence patterns as they

are given. This analysis is basic to our argument, inasmuch as it identifies

the various types of matrix, their properties, and the problems they pose.

It affords the basis for identifying the functions that various transformations might serve in solving those problems and consequently for

speculating about what transformations may be learned and the conditions under which they are likely to be elicited.

The analysis of the effective matrix, identifying its components and

their concordances and discordances, reveals how the transformation

process shifts the terms of the relationship. As shown in Chapter 6, it

is often possible to state the relations systematically between the given

and the effective matrices by formulas that link the components of the

two.

Purposes of the Mathematical Analysis

If, as some of the preceding examples (such as Figure 2.11) suggest, the

mathematical analysis does not always reveal the social psychological

foundations of the interdependence, then of what use is it? At least three

answers, some implied in the preceding paragraphs, can be offered at this

point. First, as we show in Chapter 4, the components defined mathematically are exceedingly useful in identifying the various types of matrix.

Given a classification of matrices, the mathematical analysis of the component weights of a specific matrix is useful for defining or characterizing

it so that it can be located in relation to the classes. Second, the mathematical analysis of the resultant matrix points to the kinds of specific problem

the pair must cope with if they are to realize to the fullest the potential

benefits of their relationship. The relative magnitudes of the three components and their various concordances indicate, for example, the relaCOMPONENTS OF INTERDEPENDENCE

tive importance of developing coordination rules compared with exercising control over own preferences in the interest of helping each other.

Third, the mathematical analysis of the natural components constituting a relationship reveals how they fit together, interact, and summate or cancel one another out. This is illustrated in Figure 2.12, which

provides the mathematical analysis of the three social psychological components for the cleaning example in Figure 2.11. Comparison of the three

analyses shows several important facts. Even though all components

involve MBC, they mesh in a manner that cancels out each other’s effect,

and so the resultant matrix is characterized only by MFC and BRC. The

several MFC components are oriented so that they summate, thus producing a strong preference for the partner’s doing the cleaning. The BRC

components, though individually strong, tend to cancel one another out;

the result is a weak BRC pushing each person not to clean. Thus in

combination the several social—-psychological factors simply yield MFC

greater than and discordant with BRC, the Prisoner’s Dilemma Game.

Component

Figure 2.12

Analysis of the three social-psychological components in the cleaning

example.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

SOME FORMAL CONSIDERATIONS

The analysis of the matrix in terms of three component matrices amounts

to making simultaneously two analyses of variance of the matrix, one of

A’s outcomes and the other of B’s outcomes. This is shown in Figure 2.13

for the matrix already described in Figure 2.6. Ina2 x 2 matrix the sums

of squares for each component is simply the square of the difference

corresponding to the weight of each component. Thus for A’s outcomes

in Figure 2.13 the sum of squares for columns is 22, for rows, 62, and for

interaction, 4”, the total sum of squares is 4 plus 36 plus 16, or 56. The

percentage of the total variance accounted for by each component is

simply the proportion of the total sum of squares for which its sum of

square accounts; these values are 7, 64, and 29%, respectively, for the

three components in the example.

We are not the first to suggest the analysis of variance as a means of

characterizing interdependence matrices.

This possibility has been

worked out in various degrees of detail by Wilson and Bixenstine (1962),

Wyer (1969), and Wolf (1972). One probable reason why the application of

analysis of variance to interdependence matrices has not been fully

developed (and one reason why objections will be raised to the present

analysis) is that it requires making strong assumptions about the nature of

the measurement scales underlying the values in the matrix. Analysis of

the variance components requires treating the numbers as if they were

taken from an interval scale, that is, a scale on which a difference of n

units between any two values means the same thing regardless of what

those two values are. Treating the grand mean as an interpretable term

requires the further assumption that the numbers come from a scale with

a meaningful zero point. Further, when we compare the components for

the two persons, as in describing the magnitude of A’s RC (RC,) relative

to his FC over B (FC,), it is necessary to assume that the numbers are

comparable interpersonally.

We can admit of little confidence that these assumptions will be justified in the many real-life problems to which interdependence analysis

will be applied. We are, however, impressed with the progress that has

been made in psychology on similar problems by proceeding as if such

assumptions were generally warranted.

It seems to be the practical

experience in psychological measurement and analysis that limiting oneself to the assumptions that are strictly justified (e.g., of ordinal measurement) is not so productive as being somewhat incautious by accepting

stronger assumptions. Furthermore, the stronger assumptions can be

made merely for purposes of theoretical analysis. We can simply state

that we are assuming that we have numbers froma

ratio scale at the outset

‘xEyeur

aduapuadapiajur

SOURLIPA

siskyeue

ay]

49g

=4Oy

:siyBia

S,@)

(OY

S,)

(94

8,4)

193jJ3

UWNjo9

SaWod}no

"OU

:siyBiay

rife

(9€

S,¥)

(94

S,V)

(OY

S,¥)

W9ajj9

}0aj43

uWN|OD

sawoo}no

€l'Z

amnsry

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

of our analysis. Proceeding on this basis permits us to conduct a form of

theoretical analysis that is much more powerful and illuminating than an

analysis consistent with weaker assumptions would be. The evidence for

this last statement may be found in the insights and implications presented in the following chapters, which the reader may judge for himself.

Antecedents of the

Given Matrix

Antecedents of the Components,

Antecedents of Correspondence,

Correspondent versus Noncorrespondent MBC,

Concordance between BRC and MFC,

Concordance between BRC and MBC,

Concordance between MFC and MBC,

Similarity versus Complementarity,

Antecedents of Component Weights,

Antecedents of the Grand Means,

Prt thi

” fiat) a

ere fe

legen aren pres a

be te iver Fy eet

ve sharsarorpec? iad te

| Sa

rebrk casing lune

« {8 OM bee A Awworbod ¢

bet D8 ne

4 bee Si

a oMnweie tvpnecgaa Ne

ABSTRACT

This chapter presents a social psychological analysis of the antecedents, both

environmental and personal, of the given matrix. The analysis is made in terms of

the antecedents of the components, the relations in which they stand to each other

(their correspondence-noncorrespondence and concordance-discordance), and

their relative magnitudes. It also provides a new perspective on the old problems of

similarity, complementarity, and compatibility.

The outcome values in the given matrix are determined by features of the

social and physical environment or setting in interaction with qualities

and states of the dyadic members—their needs and skills. We assume

further that the reward and cost values of the outcomes in the given matrix

will have been affected by each member’s general comparison level, by

his recent history of deprivation or satiation with a given incentive, by

fatigue developed through the effort required to enact behaviors, and by

skills determining the costs of behavioral enactments. What we are concerned with in the following pages are the ways in which environmental

or situational factors interact with these personal factors of need and skill

to determine the components of a given matrix and the relationships of

the components.

The environmental factors that we consider are those affecting the

quality and kinds of resource available to the members and spatio-temporal constraints that may impose coordination requirements on them.

We use the term environment very broadly to include natural settings and

man-made arrangements and regulations. Hence the environments we

refer to may result from the decisions of psychological experimenters,

legislators, industrial engineers, union—management negotiations, and

parents.

On the side of the personal factors this chapter constitutes an analysis,

in interdependence terms, of the personal properties that affect the

compatibility of the dyadic members. The classic interpersonal rubrics

of “similarity” and “complementarity” are viewed in new terms; for example, an important aspect of similarity is reflected in the analysis of

personal factors that produce correspondence or noncorrespondence in

MBC between the two persons. One particular form of complementarity

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

exists when the two can, by different actions, reward each other (MFC)

and when the RC of each is concordant with the FC he exercises over his

partner. The antecedents of compatibility or incompatibility are not

exhaustively considered here, however, because some of them have to do

with pattern transformations. In Chapter 7 compatibility is viewed from

the perspective of social and personal values. We show how, depending

on the given pattern of interdependence, certain pairings of value orientations are mutually supportive of the relationship and others are disruptive.

A word about terminology: in Chapter 2 we demonstrated the analysis

of a resultant matrix into three component matrices. We used the terms

BRC, MFC, and MBC to refer to them. At the same time we noted that

within a component matrix the weights for the two persons may be equal

or different. Thus in the MFC matrix FC, may be smaller or larger than

FC; in absolute magnitude or they may be equal. (Of course, if FC, = 0

and FC; is not zero, then, strictly speaking, no mutual fate control exists

but MFC may still be used to refer to that particular component matrix.) In

this and subsequent chapters, when we state that a relationship involves

a particular component, say BRC, unless further qualification is added we

mean that both persons have reflexive control and that the absolute

magnitudes of their component weights are approximately equal. Similarly, a relationship characterized by MBC is one in which both persons

are subject to about the same degree of behavior control (|BC,|=|BCa|

and both are greater than zero). The signs of the respective weights (and

the relative signs of the weights of different components) are implied by

comments about concordance and correspondence.

ANTECEDENTS OF THE COMPONENTS

The components of bilateral reflexive control derive from each person’s

preferences and aversions about performing the various behaviors in his

repertory—preferences and aversions that are not contingent on the

other person’s behavior. By itself, as a pure state of total independence,

BRC would develop in any environment in which each of two parties can

find something he prefers to do and something he prefers not to do

without affecting or being affected by the other. The requirements would

appear to be resources adequate for self-sufficiency and barriers to communication, such as physical space or self-absorption.

The component of mutual fate control is produced by each person’s

preferences and aversions for the various behaviors in the other person’s

repertory—preferences and aversions that are not contingent on variaANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

tions in his own behavior. Each person can control unconditionally the

outcomes of the other and is indifferent in regard to helping or hurting.

Pure MFC thus would require an environment in which each controls a

different set of resources that are rewarding and/or costly to the other and

which are neither rewarding nor costly to himself.

The component of mutual behavior control appears when behaviors are

selectively interfered with or facilitated by actions of the partner. The

consequences of such interference and facilitation produce the BC pattern

of rewards and costs. In general—and to oversimplify—interference creates costs and facilitation heightens rewards. Interference is produced by

response incompatibility. Responses are incompatible because they simply cannot be performed simultaneously or because they do not in some

sense

fit together—they create incongruity when performed simultaneously. The inability to perform both behaviors simultaneously often

derives from some spatial restriction or scarcity. Two persons cannot

depart simultaneously from a room because the exit is too small. In this

case the restriction is purely physical. In other cases the scarcity is

imposed by a social rule: two persons cannot simultaneously become

president of the local Kiwanis Club because a rule restricts the number of

incumbents to one. (In these two examples it must be assumed that

neither person has a preference for going first: whether exiting first or

second or being the first or second president.)

The effects of incongruity on interference are probably largely psychological. In Braithwaite’s (1955) example, when Luke plays classical piano

while Matthew improvizes jazz on the trumpet, the cacophony is costly to

both: it is harder to play and harder to listen. If the incongruity is created

by the expression of conflicting opinions voiced on the same occasion by

two persons, the interference effects may be reflected in the discomfort or

anxiety occasioned by the dissensus. (Again, for the latter example to

reflect pure MBC it is necessary to assume that the persons do not care

which opinions they voice so long as they are not different.)

Another source of incongruity has been pointed out by Foa and Foa

(1975) in their discussion of the exchange of different kinds of resource.

Although it is entirely appropriate (to say the least) to pay for one’s meal

at a restaurant, the guest who has been invited to a private home for

dinner is expected to depart from the occasion by thanking the hostess

and expressing his admiration for her culinary skills; that is, by giving

love and status. If, instead, he left a tip and attempted to pay the bill, the

embarrassment of the hostess would no doubt be made apparent to him.

The interference created by the incongruity between the loving care of the

hostess and the guest’s commercial response to it would be experienced

by both. The general point is that the outcome pattern characteristic of

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

reflect

socially, defined

appropriateness

inappropriateness of various combinations of actions. Qualitative differences in rewards may be identified on the basis of the particular actions

or other rewards to which they are most appropriate. Probably no particular rewarding action has the same value, regardless of what the

partner does. Even social approval, one of the most generally rewarding

actions, suffers in value if the recipient’s behavior clearly does not warrant it. One meaning of “economic” transaction is that the resources have

fixed inherent values that do not depend on what the partner does (the

nature of the “goods” he provides). The MBC pattern generated by

considerations of appropriateness is more characteristic of social and

affectional exchange.

Response facilitation involves not merely the absence of interference. It

may produce a decrement in the costs of producing the behaviors or an

increment in their consummatory appreciation. If Luke and Matthew can

both play and enjoy jazz, their ensemble playing—whatever the

costs—may be an agreeable improvement on the sounds of their solo

improvisations. (For this situation to generate pure MBC it must be

assumed that they derive as much pleasure when neither plays as when

both do.) In this example the efforts to synchronize may impose costs on

them; the facilitation occurs only at the level of rewards. Facilitative cost

cutting may occur in other settings; for example, when the pooled synchronous efforts of two persons (in building a house, pulling a load) make

the task easier for each. A reduction in the costs of making the response

and an increase in the rewards for having done so may occur when on the

same occasion two persons express similar mutually supportive opinions. (For further elaboration of interference and facilitation see Thibaut

and Kelley, 1959, Chapter 4.)

As we noted in Chapter 2, many of the natural social—-psychological

components

of interdependence are more complex than the simple

mathematical components. This is reflected in several of the parenthetical

qualifying remarks in the preceding paragraphs. When Luke and

Matthew find that their ensemble jazz playing is better than the solos of

either one, the pattern is pure MBC only if they also derive equal net

satisfaction when neither plays. A more common version of this situation

is shown in the conjunctive pattern in Figure 3.1, where the rewards are

derived only when both play. A noncorrespondent version of the conjunctive pattern is the “turn-taking” game in Figure 3.1. Luke may prefer

that both play and Matthew, that neither play. In each case the reward for

each person requires that both persons make a certain response. The

turn-taking game is generated by spatial restriction or scarcity (as in the

examples of leaving an area through a narrow exit or attaining the club

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

presidency) plus preferences regarding which person takes which action

(leaves or becomes president). (In terms of the analysis of Chapter 2 these

particular patterns involve all three simple mathematical components,

combined in equal proportions.) The “complement” of the conjunctive

pattern is the disjunctive one (Figure 3.1) in which rewards are high (or

costs low) if either person makes the appropriate response. Put another

way, the low outcomes are received only if both persons act improperly.

This pattern often reflects an intersubstitutability between the actions of

the two persons, as in Deutsch’s cooperation condition in which the

entire group is graded well if any of the members attain a good problem

solution (1949).

Luke

Plays

Doesn’t play

Plays

Matthew

Doesn't

play

Conjunctive pattern

Turn—taking pattern

Disjunctive pattern a

Figure 3.1

Conjunctive and disjunctive patterns characteristic of “natural” components.

ANTECEDENTS OF CORRESPONDENCE

The discussion of correspondence in Chapter 2 suggested that this property of interdependence is determined by the degree of correspondence

in the MBC component, by the concordant or discordant relations between the BRC and MFC terms, and by the concordance of MBC with

either BRC or MFC. The correspondence or noncorrespondence of a

matrix relates to the amount of conflict the pair will experience. The

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

analysis thus points to several different sources of conflict and suggests

new ways of looking at the determinants of compatibility or incompatibility between two persons. As the reader will anticipate, the

factors contributing to correspondence or noncorrespondence define different respects in which psychologically the two persons are similar or

dissimilar and complementary or anticomplementary.

Correspondent versus Noncorrespondent MBC

The dyadic pattern of correspondent MBC results when the two persons are

affected in the same way by facilitation and /or interference. In some cases

both persons have the same behavioral choices, as in the example of Luke

and Matthew (Figure 3.1), each of whom had to decide whether to play

his instrument. In these cases the symmetry of effect constituting correspondence may reflect either mutual preferences for similar behavior or

mutual preferences for different behaviors. Thus both correspondent

MBC matrices in Figure 3.2 show that persons A and B are facilitated

and/or interfered with by each other’s behavior in the same way, but in

the left matrix this symmetry results from a mutual preference for similar

behaviors and in the matrix on the right, from a mutual preference for

different or complementary behaviors. To suggest some examples, in the

left matrix C versus D might refer, respectively, to (a) reading versus

watching TV (in a small apartment), (b) talking versus being contemplative, (c) discussing politics versus discussing art, or (d) playing

classical music versus jazz (as in the earlier example). In the right matrix,

in which similar behaviors are mutually interfering and/or different ones

are facilitative,

C versus D might refer, respectively, to (a) going first

versus second through a narrow doorway, (b) taking the initiative versus

being submissive, or (c) talking versus listening (ina fine-grain analysis of

conversation). Of course, we must assume in all the foregoing examples

Similar

Different

Figure 3.2

Correspondent MBC involving similar or different behaviors.

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

for both matrices that there is no unconditional (RC) preference for either

of the two actions; for example, talking versus listening.

Noncorrespondent MBC results from asymmetry of interference or facilitation. As shown in Figure 3.3, behavioral combinations that are facilitative for one person are interfering for the other and vice versa; for

example, A andB might bea teenage boy and girl on their first date and 1

and 2 might correspond to the benches on the two sides of a table in a rear

booth at the soda fountain. The boy, A, having an interest in hugging and

physical contact, prefers them to sit on the same bench and doesn’t care

which. The girl, B, interested in conversation and finding out more about

this fellow, prefers them to set on opposite sides of the table. (The reader

can easily imagine that with similar interests both would prefer either the

same bench or opposite ones.) The asymmetry here derives from the

different goals the two have with respect to their interaction. A similar

example might be provided by Braithwaite’s musicians, both of whom

can play either piano or strings. Person A (Luke) enjoys it when both play

piano (behavior 1 in Figure 3.3) and he also enjoys their both playing

strings (behavior 2). Person B (Matthew) is presently studying music in

which a piano accompaniment is provided for a string instrument. Hence

he tries to play piano (behavior 1) when

A is playing the violin and tries to

play the violin (behavior 2) when A is playing the piano. Sometimes,

however, Matthew misjudges and finds that he is playing the same

instrument as Luke. The same outcome pattern would emerge if Matthew

were trying to have an interesting debate on the merits of two political

candidates and Luke’s intention was to reach consensus on one or the

other. Matthew would be pleased when he succeeded in disagreeing with

Luke but sometimes would miscalculate and find himself agreeing (or

perhaps be reluctantly forced to agree by the weight of evidence.)

Noncorrespondence also stems from individual and cultural differences in preferences for similarity versus difference. Suppose that

individuals vary in their preferences for discrepancy between their own

and other persons’ opinions. In the extreme case one person would prefer

Figure 3.3

Noncorrespondent MBC.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the expression of similar opinions

and the other, the expression of different opinions, the resulting matrix (for the expression of attitudes on a

given issue) being one of high noncorrespondence. As the last example

suggests, this might reflect different motives—one person seeking opinion validation and the other, a stimulating exchange of ideas. (It should

also be noted that the expression of attitudes generally involves RC and

FC components inasmuch as most persons have certain attitude positions

they prefer to state and to hear stated.) Cultural differences in preferred

interaction distances would also generate a noncorrespondent MBC pattern, similar to that described for the teenagers on their first date. Neither

person cares just where the interaction is but one prefers closeness (the

same spot) and the other, distance (different spots). These differences do

not reflect different motives but rather different interaction habits that are

facilitated or interfered with by different sets of cues.

Concordance between BRC and MFC

Whereas the crucial factor in the preceding discussion is whether the two

persons are affected in the same or different ways by combinations of their

actions, here the central question is whether they are affected in the same

or different ways by their respective actions considered singly. Each of the

two persons may have preferences about what he and the other person

does. If each person wants to do what the other wants him to do, BRC and

MFC are concordant. This may be true for reasons of reward or cost

factors or both. (In the following examples to simplify the story we speak

of the concordance resulting from both persons’ preference for the

behavior of only one of the pair.) Both A and B may get reward from A’s

behavior 1; or A may get reward from it whereas B avoids the costs

produced by behavior 2; or both may find the costs of behavior 1 to be

lower than if A performs behavior 2; and so on. In the case of moderate

concordance (i.e., concordance generating moderate correspondence) A

prefers to some degree to do what B prefers very strongly; for high

concordance both have preferences of similar strength regarding A’s

behavior.

Socially and psychologically, this concordance can be traced to learning

conditions that result in a person performing, at low cost and/or high

direct gratification, actions that other persons value. In the extreme case

the person finds joy in the very activities that help or please others. This

would be illustrated by the story teller who enjoys his own stories and

who pleases his audience, the parent who takes pleasure in building the

treehouse that the child wants, or who enjoys making clothes that the

offspring enjoys wearing. In most such instances the actor would also get

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

rewards from the other person’s responses to his help or even from the

knowledge that the other person is pleased (which would involve a value

transformation, Chapter 7), but we mean here to emphasize the direct

satisfaction the actor gains from the behavior that the other enjoys. The

case in which the costs of behaving in the manner the partner prefers are

lower than the costs of alternative behaviors might be illustrated by

the exchange of favorable evaluations. Under certain conditions, for

example, when each person’s behavior is within the general zone of

acceptability, to be critical or even to say nothing might be more costly

than to be complimentary. If each is pleased by receiving the other's

compliments, then this pleasure is concordant with the cost-savings

aspects of delivering the compliment. Concordance derived from mutual

cost reduction might occur for a pair of recently introduced persons,

neither of whom is yet ready to discuss personal matters. For cost-cutting

reasons each would prefer not only to talk about other matters himself but

also to have his partner speak of other matters.

The discordant relations between BRC and MFC reflect a conflict

between what the person prefers to do and what his partner wishes him

to do. The action desired by the partner (for reasons of reward attainment

or cost avoidance) is either less rewarding for the actor than the alternative action or more costly. If we focus on the costs for the actor (or the

rewards he forgoes) in completing the “helpful’’ action, the BRC-MFC

discordance represents the essential condition

of social exchange.

Exchange implies giving up something in exchange for receiving something. Although one may speak of “exchange” in the concordant case, in

which each « one directly appreciates what the other also prefers, exchange

is not necessary for the relation to have benefits for both. The dependence

may be unilateral, as with the story teller or helper in the concordant

examples given above. In contrast, with discordance an exchange is

necessary if there is to

be mutual satisfaction. Each person produces at

some cost to himself an action that is valuable to the other. For the

exchange to be mutually profitable the costs to self must be lower than the

rewards to the partner. Thus true social exchange occurs when the MFC

component is more important than the BRC component with which it is

discordantly associated. (When the two components are equal in magnitude, a strict conflict of interest obtains.)

The reader will think of numerous examples of exchange with discordant MFC and BRC. Youngsters can trade baseball cards when each

has a card that costs less to give up than it is worth to the partner.

(Although this may seem to imply an interpersonal comparison of costs

and rewards, no such implication is necessary. Exchange will occur if

each child makes the judgment that he prefers the other’s card to his own.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Thus only intrapersonal comparison is involved.) Exchange may be based

on complementary skills, for example, when both persons desire both

products 1 and 2 but A is more skillful at fabricating product 1 and B is

more skillful with product 2. Mutual interest in cost cutting provides the

basis for specialization of production activities.

The analysis of Foa and Foa (1975) implies that RC’s concordance or

discordance with FC depends on the nature of the resource that is being

exchanged. The implication is that discordance increases to the degree

that giving up a resource depletes the giver’s supply of that resource. If

the act of giving does not diminish the giver’s supply of the resource, the

FC-RC relationship will be neither concordant nor discordant, as in

giving information to another (although the costs of communicating the

information may contribute some discordance). The components will be

concordantly related if the act of giving increases own outcomes, as in the

giving of love. For two lovers in sexual embrace, to use an example from

Foa and Foa, the BRC is concordant with the MFC.

Concordance between BRC and MBC

Both this and the MFC-MBC concordance reflect no simple similarities or

differences between the two persons but rather the relation of the convergence between their respective RCs (or FCs) to the coordination

requirements of their MBC matrix. Concordant BRC and MBC reflects the

situation in which, when each person takes his most preferred action, the

pair is brought to a cell that is rewarding from the point of view of

behavioral facilitation. Two cases can be distinguished, depending on

whether their MBC component requires similar or different behaviors. In

the first case concordance would require that the two persons prefer the

same action; for example, in our earlier example of the activities of a

husband and wife at 5:00 pm the mutual preference for acting together

would have been promoted by their preferring, in terms of direct

rewards, the same activity, either drinking or cycling. If the MBC coordination requires different actions, then different reflexive preferences

are concordant; for example, if for its most effective performance a task

requires that one person take the initiative and the other follow, the

necessary coordination is achieved by two persons whose preferences

regarding, their own dominance or submission are different. Another

example is provided by the two persons at the start of an automobile trip.

Person A prefers to drive and person B prefers being the passenger. The

coordination requirements of the task are thus satisfied by their divergent

preferences. (The more distal antecedent of this coordination requirement is, of course, the decision of the automobile designer who provided

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

only one driver’s seat. The designer, in turn, was responding to certain

obvious physical and psychological facts relating to the human control of

machines.) These examples make clear that similarity in reflexive preferences promotes certain types of coordination but a complementary

difference in such preferences promotes other types. In both cases the

concordance reflects the fact that the preferences of the two persons for

their own behaviors are such, either similar or different, that they readily

satisfy coordination requirements.

If in the discordant case both persons follow their preferences with

regard to their own behavior, they act jointly in a manner that fails to

satisfy their preferences regarding combinations of their behavior. It is

necessary for one person to override his reflexive control if the benefits of

coordination are to be realized. Again two kinds of discordance can be

distinguished: (a) the MBC requires the same behavior of each but each

prefers different ones, and (b) the MBC requires different behaviors but

each prefers the same one.

Concordance between MFC and MBC

Here the ruling factor is the meshing between the mutually beneficent

exercise of fate control and the MBC coordination requirements. Discord

is illustrated by the game known as the Battle of the Sexes in which, for

example, each person wants the partner to do a different thing (the wife

wants the husband to dress ina ‘‘mod” fashion and he wants her to dress

conservatively), but the rewards are highest when their behaviors are

similar (they appear well together with a similar mode of dress,

whichever one it is). Again, this case, in which the different desires for the

partner’s behavior conflict with MBC requirements of similarity, can be

distinguished from the case in which similar desires for the partner’s

behavior conflict with MBC requirements of difference; for example, ina

mismatched couple each desires submissiveness from the partner, but

their tasks are predominantly those that require a pairing of leadership

with followership. The game known as Chicken involves a similar discordance: each person has a strong preference for the other one to back

down. This makes difficult the coordination on different behaviors that is

specified by the MBC component of the game.

Concordance is present when what the two persons want of each other

is consistent with what they want in the way of joint behavior. Their

desires for the same behavior from each other may be concordant with

MBC coordination that requires matching behavior or their desires for

different behavior from each other may be concordant with a coordination requiring complementary actions. As an example of the latter

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

consider A and B, both of whom can play trumpet and piano with equal

facility and enjoyment. If their ensemble playing sounds better when one

(no matter which) plays the piano and the other, the trumpet, this

advantage will be concordant with A’s liking to hear B on piano and B’s

liking to hear A on trumpet.

Similarity versus Complementarity

In many of the preceding examples it has been reasonable to assume that

the behavioral alternatives are identical for the two persons. Under these

circumstances we have seen that correspondence can reflect either similarity or complementarity between the two persons; for example, although both matrices presented in Figure 3.2 describe correspondent coordination problems, in the one case, if the behavioral choices are the same

for A and B, they must enact similar behaviors, whereas in the other they

must enact different ones. As summarized in Figure 3.4, the same distinction can be made with respect to each of the concordances relevant to

the degree of correspondence of the relationship. This figure describes

the circumstances and preferences that must exist if each of the four

factors contributing to correspondence is to reflect a case of similarity or

complementarity.

The matrix analysis is indifferent to the distinction between similarity

and complementarity, being sensitive only to differences in pattern that

Figure 3.4

General antecedents of outcome—correspondent types of interdependence.

Similarity

Complementarity

Correspondent MBC _ Similar behaviors produce

Different behaviors produce

coordination. Similar behaviors

coordination. Dissimilar

are symmetrically facilitative

behaviors are symmetrically

and/or dissimilar behaviors are

facilitative and/or similar

symmetrically interfering.

behaviors are symmetrically

interfering Concordant BRC and _ Each prefers to perform the

Each prefers to perform a

same behavior and this is the

different behavior and this is

behavior the other prefers him _ the behavior the other prefers

to perform.

him to perform.

Concordant BRC and_

Each prefers to perform the

Each prefers to perform the

similar behavior that produces _ dissimilar behavior that

coordination.

produces coordination.

Concordant MFC and_

Each prefers the other to

Each prefers the other to

perform the same behavior

perform a different behavior

and these similar behaviors

and the dissimilar behaviors

produce coordination.

produce coordination.

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

are not attributable to a particular identification or labeling of the

behavioral alternatives available to each person. The distinction, however, is an important one for the application of the analysis to social

psychological problems; for example, it seems probable that similarity or

matching MBC requirements are easier to identify and learn than the

complementary. The similarity requirements may also in general be

easier to manage on the spur of the moment; it is usually easier for one

person to imitate the other than to complement his action (as by doing the

opposite or making a compensatory adjustment.) Some of the common

complementary MBC problems are handled by rules that constrain all

interactions to one of the two +, + cells (e.g., rules of the road: driving on

the right side of the road and yielding right of way at an intersection to a

vehicle on one’s right).

In exchanges involving BRC and MFC the similarity pattern requires

not only that A derive direct reward (or cost cutting) from his own

performance of a given behavior but also that he gain additional benefits

from the same behavior in B. This is often characteristic of social activities

among peers such as singing and telling stories. Complementarity in the

BRC and MFC combinations is more common in role-differentiated relationships such as a husband-—wife pair; for example, according to

stereotyped role conceptions, he prefers to take out the garbage and have

her wash the dishes and she prefers to wash the dishes and have him take

out the garbage.

Many relationships cannot be characterized in terms of similarity versus complementarity because the two persons’ behavioral choices are not

the same. Consider, for example, the PD game. (Although this involves

discordant rather than concordant BRC and MFC, the discordant BRC is

not so great that it precludes a mutually rewarding exchange.) In the

experimental version each person has the same choice between the C and

D responses. Perhaps the most common close parallel in real life is the

relation between two sellers of a given product to the same set of buyers.

Under certain conditions of demand their respective decisions to set a

high or low price (each one facing the same choice) yield outcomes

corresponding to the PD pattern. Probably more common examples of the

pattern in economic exchange are those in which different behavioral

alternatives exist for the two persons: buyers and sellers exchanging

goods and services, different goods, services for money, and so on.

ANTECEDENTS OF COMPONENT WEIGHTS

To repeat, when more than one component is involved in an interINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

dependent relationship, they may, be combined concordantly or discordantly—and the psychological antecedents of the paired components

will differ accordingly. In addition, as described in Chapter 4, it is necessary to take into account the relative weights of the associated components. Thus true “social exchange” occurs only when the MFC term is

larger than the BRC term with which it is discordantly paired. We now

turn to a discussion of the antecedents of differently weighted combinations of the paired components.

MFC > BRC.

As inall unequally weighted pairings, the inequality can

result from one component's being very large or from the other’s being

very small (or for both reasons). In the discordant case that produces

“social exchange’ each person can at small cost to himself greatly advantage the other. In the earlier example of trading baseball cards it

might be assumed that a boy with duplicate cards will not greatly hesitate

to exchange one of his duplicates for a card that he has not yet acquired.

More generally, this trading relationship might be expected to develop

when each has a relatively large supply of a different resource that the

other strongly values. It may also develop when two persons are differentially skillful at providing two services or goods that both of them

value. The skills of each make the costs of providing a particular reward

less than its value to the partner. This pattern of discordance is exemplified by the Prisoner’s Dilemma game. In the concordant case each has

only a slight preference to do what the other strongly wants him to do.

The Matthew-Luke duo remains intact because each greatly enjoys hearing the other play, although neither receives more than slight pleasure

from his own performance. (This pattern of concordance is illustrated by

the Maximizing Difference game; see Chapter 4.)

BRC >MFC.

In this combination preferences about own behavior are

more important than those concerning the behavior of the other. In the

discordant pairing each strongly prefers not to do what the other slightly

prefers him to do. This might be exemplified by the strained relations

between two diplomats from rival countries: each finds it personally quite

costly to give the other the compliment each mildly feels he deserves out

of respect for diplomatic protocol. A general case would be an attempt by

two persons to exchange different resources, each giving something of

which he has a smaller supply than his partner; or they might attempt to

exchange mutually valued services that neither one is expert in performing, the costs being too high to be offset by the reward value to the

partner. The concordant case implies that each strongly prefers to do what

the other only slightly prefers him to do. Thus Luke and Matthew may

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

strongly prefer to play the guitar (rather than, say, being quiet) but

experience only a marginal increase in pleasure from one another's playing.

MBC > BRC. _ In general, coordination is more important than reflexive

preferences. In the discordant case two behaviors meet the strong coordination requirement, but both persons are somewhat inclined to prefer the behavior that leads to incoordination. In the example of the

automobile trip both persons may mildly prefer to be the driver or both

may have inclinations to be passengers. In the concordant case again two

behaviors meet the strong coordination requirements, but the behaviors

are so similar that there is little basis for personal preference (as in sitting

on one or the other end of a teetertotter). If the behaviors are quite

different, the persons’ preferences for them are weak: one weakly prefers

to drive the car and the other mildly likes being a passenger.

BRC >MBC.

Now, coordination becomes less important than preferences about own behavior. In the discordant case the two behaviors or

roles that satisfy the weak coordination requirement are so strongly

relevant to the persons’ needs or abilities that each strongly prefers to

perform the behavior leading to incoordination. If the two persons in the

example of the activities of husband and wife at 5:00 p.m. (Chapter 2)

have strong and different preferences for the two activities of drinking

and cycling, they will not meet the coordination requirement (weak in

this version of the example) of doing things together. The concordant case

is similar except that the strong preferences for own behavior lead to

satisfaction of a weak coordination requirement. Both husband and wife

prefer martinis to bicycles and enjoy martinis even (somewhat) more

when together.

MBC >MFC.

Here, in general, coordination is more’important than

preferences about the other’s behavior. (Battle of the Sexes, Chapter 4,

exemplifies the discordant version of this unequally weighted combination

of MBC and MFC.) In the example of the automobile trip there is a strong

coordination requirement that one drive and one “ride.” Although

neither person has a preference with regard to his or her own driving or

sitting, the discordant case is produced if each is slightly afraid of the

other’s driving. Concordance occurs when both persons have mild preferences for the other’s behavior that lead to meeting a strong coordination requirement. Two musicians sound much better when one plays

trumpet and the other, piano. Both play trumpet and piano with equal

facility and enjoyment butA mildly prefers to hear B on trumpet and B has

an equally small but real preference to hear A on piano.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

MFC >MBC.

The coordination requirement is relaxed. Discordance is

well illustrated by the game of “Chicken” for this unequally weighted

combination. Each person in the game has a strong preference for the

other one to back down, such preference outweighing the coordination

requirement. The concordant case is realized when strong preferences for

particular behaviors from each other support the weak coordination

requirement. Two musicians sound somewhat better when one plays

trumpet and the other plays piano, and A strongly prefers to hear B on

trumpet, whereas B strongly prefers to hear A on piano.

ANTECEDENTS OF THE GRAND MEANS

We assume that each person scales his outcomes in relation to a comparison level (CL). (In Chapter 6 we consider the consequences of possible nonlinear effects in this scaling.) Therefore the average level of each

person’s outcomes in the matrix (his GM) reflects the magnitudes of the

rewards to be enjoyed and costs to be incurred in relation to his CL. As

described more fully in Thibaut and Kelley (1959), the CL is the level of

outcomes the person feels he deserves on the basis of his experience in

other similar relationships and his understanding of the satisfaction persons in such relationships should and do enjoy. The outcomes in the

particular matrix are positive if above CL and negative if below it, the

person being satisfied or dissatisfied, respectively. His GM does not, of

course, necessarily reflect the level of outcomes the person typically

attains within the dyad. If the pattern is sufficiently correspondent and if

the two persons succeed in attaining the high outcomes and avoiding the

low, each person’s outcomes may be considerably higher than his GM.

Alternatively, if the two persons become trapped in a cell with low

outcomes, their outcomes may be considerably lower than their GMs.

(The superiority of the attained outcomes relative to the GMs might be

used as an indicator of the efficiency of the dyad.) To simplify the

following discussion, however, we assume that the attained level

of outcomes for each person is approximately equal to his GM in the

matrix.

Assume, then, that the GM reflects the person’s general level of satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the interaction summarized by the interdependence matrix. Would a person continue interaction if his outcomes

were generally negative? The answer is found in the nature of his alternatives to the present interaction. The specific matrix may be only part of

the total dyadic relationship, and one person may accept negative outcomes in it as part of an extended trading process in which they are offset

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

by positive outcomes in other domains of the relationship. (In this case we

might wish to expand the matrix to incorporate all the significant parts of

the relationship, the positive as well as the negative.)

If the person’s outcomes within the total realm of the dyadic interaction

are generally negative and if, nevertheless, he continues the interaction,

itis presumed that his alternatives to being in this dyad are even worse.

More generally, each person is assumed to have a comparison level for

alternatives (CL,,,) for each relationship. This is the level of outcomes he

believes he can obtain from interactions and activities (including solitary

ones) that are available to him as alternatives to the present interaction.

When outcomes in the latter drop below the CL,),, he (sooner or later)

leaves it and moves to his alternatives. According to this logic, if he

believes those alternatives to yield poorer outcomes than the present

relationship, he will remain in it even if it is not producing outcomes he

regards, in relation to the CL, as satisfactory. The antecedents of this

situation, in which his GM is negative, are found in experiences and

conditions that produce a gap between his CL and his CL,;,. In one

common case more attractive relationships are highly salient for him and

his CL is high. However, he is required to remain in the present less

rewarding relationship because the social, emotional, or legal costs entailed in moving to the better alternatives are too high (his CL,), is low).

This is an appropriate place to consider the interdependence implications of the GMs and CL,,,s of the two persons. Any relationship can be

considered in terms of the behavior alternatives shown in Figure 3.5, in

which each person’s choice is between being inside or outside the relationship. ‘In’ refers to being oriented to the dyad—desiring to continue (or resume) it. ‘““Out’’ refers to moving into the best available

alternative relationship. When both persons choose “‘in,”” they interact

within the dyad and each person receives a level of outcomes we assume

(see before) to be approximately equal to his GM. When either person

chooses “out” (i.e., to leave this dyad and pursue his alternative sources

of reward), he moves to the level of outcomes represented by his CL,),.

Figure 3.5

The interdependence pattern for being

inside or outside a relationship.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

When one person chooses “out” and the other chooses “in,” the latter is

cast into a state of limbo. Because the relationship does not exist and

interaction cannot take place unless both persons are ‘‘in,” he is caught

somewhere between the dyad and his alternative. The question mark for

his outcomes reflect uncertainty about the consequences of this inbetween status. It is probably less satisfactory than the CL,), (as indicated

by the connotations of unrequited love and rejected offer of friendship)

and the person will probably eventually move to his alternative. The

in-out cell is probably also somewhat uncomfortable for the person who

is ‘‘out’’—if he or she knows that the partner desires to resume the

relationship. (If the person is completely “out,” the partner’s orientation

may not be apparent.) In sum, the pattern of outcomes for an ongoing

relationship is probably similar to one of the two patterns in Figure 3.6.

Case I illustrates symmetrical dependence. A person’s dependence is a

function of how much his GM exceeds his CL,,,. In Case I the two persons

are equally dependent on the existence of their relationship. The components of the interdependence are primarily MBC—each person wanting to match the partner’s “in” or ‘‘out’’ choice—and MFC—each one

wanting the partner to be “in” rather than “out.” In Case II B’s dependence is far greater than A’s. According to the principle of least interest, A

can be expected to exercise greater power within the relationship than B:

“That person is able to dictate the conditions of association whose interest

in the continuation of the affair is least’’ (Waller and Hill, 1951, p. 191). As

we show in Chapter 10, A’s high CL,;, (high in relation to his outcomes in

the A-B dyad) affords him a bargaining position from which he can make

a strong case for receiving his higher outcomes within the relationship;

that is, among the pairs of outcomes available within the A-B dyad (which

are summarized by the two GMs), A can lay claim to those that yield his

higher outcomes even if they happen to yield B rather low ones. Up toa

point (at which he is not realizing the good outcomes reflected in GM ,

Case I

Case II

Figure 3.6

Typical outcome patterns for the in/out choice matrix.

ANTECEDENTS OF GIVEN MATRIX

and is being pushed too close to his CL,,,), B will be willing to honor A’s

claims in order to ensure the continuation of the dyad.

The antecedents of dependence are, of course, found in conditions that

result in high rewards being uniquely available in the particular relationship. Individuals whose personal properties (e.g., attractiveness,

skills) enable them to attain good outcomes ina number of different dyads

are not greatly dependent on any given dyad. A person who derives a

highly unique kind of satisfaction from the partner and who therefore

finds the partner irreplaceable is, of course, highly dependent on that

partner. Two persons who manage to please each other in ways they have

never experienced with other partners and do not expect in other relationships have the basis for strong mutual dependence. Social and personal rules that delimit certain highly rewarding activities (e.g., sex,

personal intimacies) to a given dyad serve to heighten and maintain the

interdependence of that dyad.

wets §

r H

“eth

anos

te ied i

epee

trey iagha

4 antien eee

als, ease cua inl

itera

aVioowel

Vit} of/

arf ee oun vias eds paris.

(eden ef ub isnivicnedthh.

a ei. . ta apy’ Avid aythyber,

a et papas pvesys tt adler

whiny ph

tebe! Oi fare Lobia

teow

tera

bine aid

weit

sheet

ofttg parry eas aroha 7

Hapa,

aes 2oers

ath oi ary

ww) Tee

j feet

aeeg

yeti

iene

eet a

Se on

chy)

ae ex aaa

bing

ifcor Sapte

sshonit

eed aay

40d)

Sash

OE eS ne egal Ws

(4G

ve en

belly

= i

yl —* Ve MV

Ole,

Uh a

The Domain of

2 X 2 Matrices

Strategies for Exploring the Domain,

Properties of the Domain,

Distribution of Matrices,

Two-Outcome-Level Matrices,

The Rapoport and Guyer Matrices,

Outlines of the Domain,

Patterns Based on Symmetric Components,

Combinations of MFC and MBC,

Combinations of BRC and MBC,

Combinations of BRC and MFC,

Combinations of All Three Components,

Social Psychological Significance, 102

Prior Research, 106

Salient Matrices, 109

epee:

6 dint dP Mev haan lop

4érmitel ns

Orth Penlp t

apt?

sift

Iogear

steer qe

silageeyy) ee mew a ”

Mitte Awe

M4 hae De

- i To

aul doy a5

i ser yon y rin A by os

Pgs yagi he

“—s

ABSTRACT

This chapter considers the various possible patterns of the simplest matrix (the

2 x2) and the principal properties of the total domain of such matrices. They are

classified with respect to four properties: (a) mutuality of dependence, (b) degree of

dependence, (c) bases of dependence, and (d) correspondence of outcomes. Variations in the last property, which reflects commonality versus conflict of interest,

are shown to depend in important ways on combinations of the first three

properties. Various important patterns and common “‘games”’ are identified and

located within the domain and in relation to one another. Although it is not

possible to consider every possible matrix, the analysis of matrices into components (as described in Chapter 2) and the relation of these components to

properties of the domain give confidence in the comprehensiveness of the

exploration.

In this chapter we consider the different patterns of interdependence that

are generated by the many possible combinations of components as they

vary in their relative magnitudes and in their correspondence and concordant—discordant orientations. For practical purposes we limit our

exploration to 2 x 2 matrices.

As noted in Chapter 2, the analysis of components and patterns applies

equally to the given and the effective matrix of interdependence. Thus the

taxonomy of patterns presented here could be used for classifying a set of

given or a set of effective matrices. In Chapter 7 we use the present

taxonomy as a basis for identifying the main examples of given matrices

that have certain properties. We examine them systematically for what

they imply to be functionally useful transformations of the given matrix

into the effective one. The present classification system gives us assurance

at that crucial point that our sample of matrices is comprehensive and

consequently that our analysis is well founded.

The major purpose of our exploration of the 2 x 2 domain is to identify

the properties or dimensions with respect to which interdependence

patterns differ. These will provide us with a framework for locating

patterns relative to one another and for imposing a rough classification on

them. At the conclusion of this effort we will have an understanding of

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the attribute space” that characterizes interdependent relationships and

this in turn can be examined in relation to the classification of relationships provided by other theoretical perspectives or by analyses of the

layman’s perception of social relationships. In Chapter 5 we analyze the

major properties more systematically, suggest quantitative indices for

them, and determine exactly how they relate to the components and their

intermeshing.

Beyond our special purposes in exploring the domain of 2 x 2 matrices, the reader will find this chapter useful in calling his attention to

various important patterns that, because of their special properties, he

may wish to remember. There is, of course, an infinite number of patterns. Within this universe, however, there is a limited number of

noteworthy patterns—some 20 or 30. These patterns are special for different reasons—some because of their simplicity, others because of a

property they represent in an extreme degree, and others because they

face the interdependent person with sharp dilemmas of choice.

STRATEGIES FOR EXPLORING THE DOMAIN

In principle, all possible patterns of interdependence can be constructed

by combining the three components in all possible sets of magnitudes and

concordances. In practice, the number of matrices generated in this

manner is endless and, because they vary continuously rather than discretely, the task of distinguishing among them becomes difficult. An

alternative approach is to consider the domain of all possible patterns as a

large terrain to be explored while the salient features and landmarks

along the particular trails followed are noted. Because we can select these

trails in a systematic manner (by selecting certain discrete values of the

components) and because the terrain has regular features (due to its

combinatorial genesis), we can more or less fill in the unexplored portions

of the map by extrapolation from our limited observations. There are,

however, a number of ways to explore the domain and, as we show, what

one discovers on his journeys depends on the particular constraints he

places on his search process.

Rapoport and Guyer (1966) restricted their analysis of 2. x 2 matrices to

those in which each person's four outcomes are completely ranked, the

most desirable having a value of 4, the second most desirable, a value of 3,

and the least desirable, a value of 1. Then all possible configurations of

such matrices were identified and the 78 unique configurations were

classified. Whereas the Rapoport and Guyer procedure distinguishes

four levels of outcome for each person and requires that each level occur

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

only once in the matrix, we begin with a simpler approach in which we

distinguish only two levels of outcome for each person, that is, high and

low, and then identify all their possible combinations and configurations;

for example, we distinguish all the different patterns in which one person

has two high and two low outcomes, the other person, one high and three

low outcomes.

A second strategy for identifying and classifying various matrices is

provided by the component analysis. The general approach is to consider

all possible combinations of components of various magnitudes and to

combine them in all the different ways possible. Because of the extremely

large number of possibilities, this is feasible only if certain constraints are

placed on the sets of components chosen for combination. Later we

consider patterns based on symmetric components. Components are

symmetric when the two persons are subject to a given type of control,

whether reflexive, fate, or behavior control, to the same degree.

Several observations can be made about these two strategies for exploring the domain of matrices. First, the second strategy is the more general

and subsumes the first under it. Thus the exploration of the matrices

defined by various levels of outcome can be described in terms of combinations of particular values of the components; for example, by applying the component analysis to the Rapoport and Guyer matrices we find

that very special sets of components are involved. (If the reader objects to

applying the analysis of variance to the rank-ordered outcomes, he need

only be reminded that we are doing this simply to characterize this

particular set of matrices and to relate them to the larger universe of

matrices.) The Rapoport and Guyer matrices are restricted to the sets in

which each person has component weights of 2, 1, and 0, which are

distributed in all possible ways over his RC, FC, and BC terms. The same

observations can be made about the two-outcome-level matrices to be

considered later. Identification of all possible patterns of two-outcome

levels amounts to considering all possible combinations of certain sets of

weights for the two persons.

Second, the matrices one ‘’sees’’ in his exploration of the domain

depend on the particular constraints he places on his exploration process;

for example, because the Rapoport and Guyer strategy implicitly restricts

our purview to patterns in which each person has weights 2, 1, and 0

distributed over his three components, it does not permit us to identify

matrices such as pure MFC, pure MBC, the simple FC-BC pattern, or

combinations of all three weighted equally. Similar limitations exist for

the sample of two-outcome-level matrices. The sample does not include

symmetrical component patterns found in the Rapoport and Guyer

sample, such as those of PDG, Chicken, and Battle of the Sexes.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The fact that the patterns of interdependence depend on the number of

outcome levels distinguished has an interesting social-psychological

implication; that is, the kinds of relationships interdependent persons

experience will depend on how discriminating they are among their

outcomes. Persons who, in 2 x 2 cases, distinguish only high and low

levels, will never be faced with the subtleties of the Prisoner’s Dilemma or

similar patterns requiring finer discriminations. This might be true for the

infant who knows only that he is comfortable or uncomfortable or for the

newcomer to a foreign country who, for reasons of language or cultural

handicaps, can distinguish only that other persons are being friendly or

unfriendly toward him.

One might question the wisdom of considering matrices involving only

gross distinctions in outcome (e.g., only high and low). It is not easy,

however, to know how fine a scaling of outcomes the actors are capable

of. This ability undoubtedly varies as a function of their experience,

knowledge, freedom from time pressure, and the nature of the specific

consequences represented in the matrix (their complexity and commensurability). In the absence of specific evidence on this point we

believe it is desirable to conduct the analysis at different levels of fineness.

Certainly, there is a strong esthetic appeal in the simplicity of the twooutcome-level analysis in which minimal assumptions are made about

the valuational skills of the actors.

For reasons implied—that we want to see all the major types of possible

pattern including those available to highly discriminating persons as well

as those who make only gross distinctions—we decided to use several

different exploration strategies.

PROPERTIES OF THE DOMAIN

We have chosen to differentiate the various matrices on the basis of their

properties—the configurations, patterns, and components they display.

Although we often speculate about the behavioral consequences of different matrices, these comments are intended merely to suggest the social

and behavioral implications of the matrix analysis. We have tried to avoid

relying on such speculations as the basis for description and classification. This reliance seems to us to blur the distinction between the

structure of interdependence and the interaction process of which structure

is only a partial determinant.

Our approach is to be contrasted with that of Rapoport and Guyer

(1966). They analyzed the ranked-outcome patterns in terms of (a) what

outcomes each person will receive as a consequence of their making

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

simultaneous and independent choices and (b) what a person who is not

satisfied with the initial results can do, anticipating a second choice

occasion, to improve his outcome. The assumptions concerning the basis

of these choices follow those of game theory as closely as possible. Each

person is assumed to have complete knowledge of the matrix. The criteria

used in making the initial choices generally involve attempts to maximize

one’s own outcomes. There is no assumption that the persons are able, on

successive occasions, to work out collusive turntaking arrangements. As

we detail in Chapter 6, such arrangements change the game and therefore

are viewed from the game theoretical perspective as irrelevant to the

characterization of a given pattern.

In contrast, our general theoretical perspective is one of problem solving. Given matrices (given, in the technical sense defined in Chapter 1)

are viewed as problems to be solved rather than as final, fixed causes of

behavior. The problem-solving analogy implies that the reactions to a

particular given matrix will be diverse, themselves characterized by pattern and structure, and even involving redefinitions of the problem. In

the classic game theoretic view, illustrated by the Rapoport and Guyer

analysis, the game matrix represents the final definition and distillation of

the social situation to be used with narrow choice criteria in prescribing

what each player should do. This meaning of the matrix corresponds to

our conception of the effective matrix as being the definition of the relationship most closely linked to behavior. Because of our central interest in

both given and effective matrices and in the links between them, we must

characterize them in the same terms. This precludes classification in

terms of their behavioral consequences and limits us to the use of matrix

properties as such. *

Excluding the case of perfect independence (the matrix of bilateral

reflexive control), 2 x 2 matrices can be classified in terms of four major

properties: (a) mutuality of dependence: whether there is mutual dependence (to be referred to as interdependence) or unilateral dependence (to be

referred to simply as dependence); (b) degree of dependence: the degree to

which the one or two persons are dependent on their partners; (c) bases of

dependence: whether the dependence in the relationship involves fate

control, behavior control, or some combination of the two; and (d) cor* Our use of the term behavior control to characterize a particular pattern in the matrix may

seem inconsistent with this point. It implies a simple scenario of interaction, namely, if B is

subject to BC and A varies his behavior, B is likely to vary his as well. However, we intend

that the term simply refer to the fact that when A varies his behavior it is desirable for B to

vary his also. Whether B does so is another matter, determined by other factors. In

retrospect it might have been wise to adopt terms more descriptive of the matrix pattern

thanare fate control and behavior control. It seemed simpler and we found it more natural to

continue using those terms that we had adopted earlier (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959).

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

respondence of outcomes: degree to which the outcomes of the two persons

are correspondent or noncorrespondent. Figure 4.1 presents a convenient way for locating matrices with respect to the first three of these

four properties. It is, ina sense, our basic road map of the 2 x 2 domain.

The central orienting point in Figure 4.1 is the state of independence.

The matrix there is characterized by bilaterial reflexive control (BRC).

Above this central point is the realm of interdependence. As we move

upward, each person’s dependence increases so that patterns of total

interdependence are at the top of the map. Along the first branch these

are characterized by mutual fate control (MFC), along the third branch, by

mutual behavior control (MBC), and along the second and fourth

branches, by mixtures of fate control (FC) and behavior control (BC). Two

kinds of mixture can be distinguished, namely, those at the end of the

second branch in which each person is subject to both FC and BC and

those at the end of the fourth, dotted branch in which one person (person

A) is subject to FC and the other person (person B) is subject to BC.

(Throughout what follows A is used to designate the person whose

behavioral choices are represented by the columns of the matrix and B,

the person whose choices are represented by the rows.)

Intermediate degrees of interdependence, between the extremes of no

interdependence at BRC or of complete interdependence at the top of the

domain, are located at intermediate positions along the upward branches

of the map. As we move upward along a branch the reflexive control is

reduced for each person and replaced by FC, BC, or their combination,

depending on the particular branch being followed. Other possible

(FC, FC)

(FC+BC, FC+BC)

(BC, BC)

Interdependence

MIXED

FC; BE

Independence

a aa 4

Dependence

FC, RC

FC +BC, RC

BC, RC

Figure 4.1.

Map of variations in dependence and bases of dependence.

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

branches, not shown, are intermediate between those in Figure 4.1.

These would involve mixtures of FC and BC but with the predominant

component being one or the other. To avoid confusion these and other

intermediate branches of the map are omitted.

The lower part of Figure 4.1 shows matrices of unilateral dependence.

At the level of total dependence the dependent person (it will be person

A) is subject wholly to FC, BC or some mixture of the two, but the partner

(person B) is subject only to RC. Again, intermediate degrees of A’s

dependence are located at intermediate positions along the appropriate

branch. As we move downward from BRC, person A’s RC is reduced and

replaced by FC, BC, or both, depending on the branch.

Figure 4.1 provides a means of locating matrices with respect to mutuality, degree, and bases of dependence. The fourth property, correspondence of outcomes, can be plotted orthogonally to each branch of

the figure. In this way we can see how variations in the degree and type of

interdependence affect the degree of commonality of interest between the

two persons. This is shown in Figure 4.2, which is explained in the

following section.

DISTRIBUTION OF MATRICES

We now proceed to explore this domain of 2 x 2 matrices. We shall

determine how the important fourth property of matrices, their correspondence or noncorrespondence, is related to the other properties.

We first show the locations of various two-outcome-level (TOL) matrices

and some of the ranked-outcome (RO) matrices classified by Rapoport

and Guyer. These matrices, supplemented by other cases, will give us a

view of the general outlines of the domain.

Two-Outcome-Level Matrices

It is possible to construct 30 different matrices by defining two outcome

levels, high and low, for each person. Each person may have zero to four

high outcomes ina2 X 2 matrix but the extreme cases, 0 and 4, are of no

interest to us because the person’s outcome does not vary. Thus it is

necessary to consider only those possible patterns in which each person

has one, two, or three high outcomes. The reader can determine for

himself that there are three different patterns in which each person has

only one high outcome; six different patterns in which one has one high

outcome and the other has two; four patterns with one and three, eight

with two for each, six with two and three, and three with three for each. In

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

developing these possibilities, it must be kept in mind that a pattern is

unique only if it is not possible by relabeling the rows and/or columns or

by interchanging the labeling of persons A and B to convert it into one of

the other patterns in the set. (In practice, the process of identifying all the

unique patterns by drawing up matrices and comparing them with others

already identified is rather cumbersome and subject to error. One of the

benefits of the component analysis is that it provides a more systematic

and foolproof procedure for identifying all the possible matrices.)

The locations of some of the two-outcome-level (TOL) patterns are

indicated in Figure 4.2 by Ts. (The Rs in the figure indicate the locations of

ranked-outcome matrices, discussed later.) Along each branch of the

figure we have introduced correspondence of outcomes as an orthogonal

variable. Patterns of extreme correspondence are located at the right edge

of each small table and those of extreme noncorrespondence, at the left

edge. Patterns in the center of each small table are characterized by

neither correspondence nor noncorrespondence of outcomes.

(Correspondence is indexed here according to the formula given in Chapter

5.) An extra small table at the top of Figure 4.2 displays the patterns of

total interdependence. They have no RC for either person and reflect

different combinations of FC and BC but are of special interest because of

the high degree to which the two persons are interdependent.

Twenty-two of the 30 possible TOL patterns are located at the 14

positions shown in Figure 4.2. (Several patterns are located at certain of

the positions. Also, the reader will note that BRC is repeated in each small

table, whenever appropriate.) Varying degrees of correspondence occur

at most points in the domain; for example, four different degrees of

correspondence are represented by the mixtures of FC and BC at the

intermediate level of interdependence. The reason, of course, is that

these components can vary in their concordance and, when MBC is

involved, in correspondence.

The remaining eight TOL patterns constitute mixtures of interdependence and dependence. All involve some asymmetry in dependence even though each person is, to some degree, dependent on the

other. If the reader can imagine folding Figure 4.2 lengthwise along the

horizontal line of independence, these eight patterns would be located at

positions intermediate between the upper and lower levels of the fold.

An examination of the distribution of the TOL matrices in Figure 4.2

shows that these simple matrices cover a considerable portion of the

2 X 2 domain. A good deal of the possible variety in patterning is captured by matrices in which only high versus low outcomes are distinguished. On the other hand, it is clear that some parts of the domain

are not represented by TOL matrices. This is certainly true with respect to

“UFPUIOP

94}

SadTyeU

SNOLIeA

UOT}EIOY

Z"p

B1q

‘Og

‘Og+94

‘Od

aduapuadaq

aduapuadapu]

aduapuedapiaju|

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

intermediate degrees of interdependence, which are represented among

the TOL matrices only by patterns involving mixtures of FC and BC, and

the same is true for intermediate degrees of dependence.

The Rapoport and Guyer Matrices

As noted earlier, in basing their taxonomy on matrices in which each

person’s four outcomes are defined in terms of rank orders, Rapoport and

Guyer limited themselves to matrices in which each person’s three component weights are in the ratio 2:1:0. This is without respect to order, so

one person’s RC, FC, and BC component weights may be in the ratio

1:0:2, respectively, whereas another’s may be in the ratio 0:2:1. The

component analysis affords a convenient method for determining how

many such matrices there are and for generating a complete list of them.

Seventy-eight different patterns can be generated with the 2:1:0 ratio of

components.

In Figure 4.2 Rs show the locations of 26 of the ranked-outcome (RO)

patterns on our map of the 2 x 2 domain. (Two patterns are located at

each of eight locations in the figure; therefore only 18 locations are

indicated.) These 26 are the only ones among the 78 possible RO patterns

that can be located directly on the branches of the domain. Because of the

required ratio of the components, the remaining patterns fall either in the

‘fold’ between dependence and interdependence (48 patterns) or between the mixed and the FC, BC interdependence patterns. Thus there

are no pure cases of unilateral dependence. With the 2:1:0 weights A may

be totally dependent on B but the latter is always partly dependent on A.

The only cases of mixed interdependence are those at the level of total

interdependence. Mixtures at lower levels of interdependence require

that all three components be greater than zero for both persons.

Outlines of the Domain

The locations of the TOL and RO patterns in Figure 4.2 begin to reveal the

outlines of the2 x 2 domain; but even together they show only part of the

picture. Using the components analysis, it is a simple matter to construct

other matrices to fill out the gaps in Figure 4.2 and to determine their

correspondence. The locations of these additional patterns are shown in

Figure 4.2 by small circles.

Figure

4.2 makes

it clear

that

entire

range

of correspondence—noncorrespondence does not occur at all points along the

branches of the ‘“map” (i.e., for all combinations of mutuality, degree,

and bases of dependence). Among the patterns of interdependence, in

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

the upper part of the figure, the maximum range occurs at intermediate

degrees of interdependence when it is based on MFC but at maximum

interdependence when it is based on MBC. Correspondence and noncorrespondence never become extreme when the interdependence is

based on one person’s FC and the other’s BC.

Among the dependent patterns correspondence is always neutral for

BC,

combinations.

maximum

range

of correspondence—noncorrespondence occurs only for combinations in which the

dependent person is subject, wholly or in part, to FC, and the maximum

range occurs only at the most extreme degree of dependence.

PATTERNS BASED ON SYMMETRIC COMPONENTS

Our final foray into the domain of 2 x 2 matrices is limited to patterns

based on symmetric components. These are the patterns in which the two

persons are affected by each type of control to the same degree; that is, A’s

component weight for RC is of the same magnitude as B’s and the same is

true, respectively, for their FC and BC weights. In short, IRC 4! = |RCgl,

IFC ,| = |FC,|, and IBC,,| = IBC ,!. Therefore, when we refer to an MFC

component of 4, we mean that each person’s weight for FC has a value of

4. The sign of each FC weight may be positive or negative and is reflected

in the concordant—discordant relations between the MFC component and

the other components.

We now consider not only the distribution of patterns over our map of

the domain but also the details of the patterns themselves. This will give

us a close look at the details of the interdependence portion of our map

(with the exception of the FC, BC part). In particular, we will have an

opportunity to note the location of certain classical patterns such as the

Prisoner’s Dilemma, Battle of the Sexes, and Chicken. First we examine

combinations of pairs of the components and then combinations of all

three.

Combinations of MFC and MBC

Figure 4.3 presents the set of patterns generated by combining MFC and

MBC in various proportions, as indicated along the vertical axis of the

figure. For each ratio of MFC to MBC the components are combined in all

possible concordant and discordant relations. BRC being absent, these

patterns represent cases of total interdependence. Thus Figure 4.3 constitutes an exploration in detail of the uppermost chart in Figure 4.2. As

there, noncorrespondent and correspondent MBC define the extremes of

Ratio

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Noncorrespondence

Degree of correspondence

Figure 4.3

Combinations of MFC and MBC.

the correspondence dimension and MFC provides a_definition of its

midpoint. The distribution of the patterns in Figure 4.3 shows that with

increasing preponderance of MFC the mixtures approach the middle of

the correspondence—noncorrespondence dimension. (The two columns

of matrices on the right of the figure share the same correspondence

values. Those on the right, however, are more correspondent when a

correction is made in the index of correspondence to take account

of the shape of the ‘frontier.’ This correction is discussed in Chapter

The patterns in Figure 4.3 reflect the relations between actions necessary to exercise benevolent fate control and the pairs of actions necessary

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

to satisfy coordination preferences or requirements. The BRC component

being absent, these patterns have the important property that the person

has no behavioral choice that he prefers regardless of what the partner

does (often referred to as a dominant choice). Moreover, the person’s two

alternative behaviors present him with a relatively risky versus a relatively safe choice. Depending on what the partner does, one action

affords sharply different possible outcomes (e.g., 12 versus 0), whereas

the other action provides more similar ones (e.g., 8 versus 4). The degree

to which this is true increases as the MFC and MBC components become

increasingly equal in magnitude, the outcomes for the equal case being 12

versus 0 compared with 6 versus 6. Thus each person has no RC basis for

choice (his two actions yield him the same average outcome), but he is

given the possibility of choice on the basis of perceived riskiness (differences in variability of possible outcomes).

Among the occasions on which the two persons have the same preferences regarding their joint outcomes (correspondent MBC) the MFC

can be either concordant or discordant with these preferences. The concordant patterns, shown along the right side of Figure 4.3, have relatively

high correspondence and in all cases there is a mutually preferred joint

activity, CC. For each person action C is the one that both helps the

partner and involves the greatest risk. Thus successful accommodation

here probably requires willingness to help the partner in the confidence

that he will reciprocate. This problem seems to become most severe with

intermediate ratios of MFC to MBC, the patterns in which the fate control

over the partner is considerable but enough MBC is present that the

combination involves considerably greater risk for the helping action.

Two of the discordant patterns, differing only in the relative magnitudes of MBC and MFC, have been referred to as Chicken and Battle of

the Sexes. The Chicken pattern provides an opportunity to demonstrate

one’s willingness to take risk and in doing so to outdo the other person.

For this to be true Chicken must be located at an appropriate intermediate

position between pure MFC (where there is maximum ability to reduce

the other’s outcomes and to maximize one’s potential advantage over him

but no difference between the choices in their riskiness) and MFC = MBC

(where D is, to a maximal degree, the riskier choice, but the difference in

possible scores is not very great, correspondence being rather considerable). In Chapter 5 we discuss more systematically the question

raised here of the optimal ratios of components for certain patterns. The

irony of Chicken lies in the fact that although CC yields good outcomes for

both persons the pull of competition and risk-taking motivation moves

the two persons away from that cell to the mutually least advantageous.

This is to be contrasted with the Prisoner’s Dilemma in which the same

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

effect is achieved by virtue of each person’s pursuit of his RC and,

possibly, a competitive advantage.

Battle of the Sexes refers to the problem a husband and wife often have

in coordinating their activities because of their preferences for what each

other does; for example, they both strongly prefer that one play the piano

while the other sings rather than have both attempt either activity. Yet

each (less strongly) prefers to hear his partner play the piano rather than

sing. The predominance of the MBC factor means that coordination is the

salient feature of the Battle of the Sexes relationship. The discordant MFC

component creates a situation in which the strong coordination preferences are best satisfied only by_an alteration procedure in which each

person temporarily permits the other to act in a way the former does not

prefer. These properties, characteristic of the Battle of the Sexes relationship, are present over a range of MFC to MBC ratios, but it seems

intuitively clear that the conflict between the coordination requirement

and the MFC preferences becomes sharpest for ratios of MFC and MBC in

the neighborhood of 4:8. It is here that it is highly important that the pair

coordinate on one or the other of the two cells with high totals and,

because the difference in payoffs is fairly large in these cells, that the pair

alternate between them. Again we encounter the problem of the optimal

ratio of components for a given pattern, a problem to be considered in

Chapter 5.

The combinations of MFC and noncorrespondent MBC are all asymmetric games. (Compare the symmetry of outcomes around the major

diagonal of the matrices on the right of Figure 4.3 with the asymmetry in

the matrices on the left.) In the patterns in Figure 4.3 the MFC is concordant with A’s coordination preferences and discordant with B’s. This

asymmetry is reflected in two properties of the pattern. First, the maximum total outcomes (often referred to as maximal joint payoff or MJP)

are attained only by a joint action that favors A. Thus, if equal outcomes

are to be attained by some sort of alternation, something less than MJP

must be acceptable for the pair. This irreconcilability between MJP and

equal division appears to be most severe with patterns in the region of 4:8

to6:6. Itis for these patterns that (a) B is greatly concerned about his small

share of the MJP cell and (b) the joint profit is greatly reduced by adopting

a procedure that permits equal shares. This irreconcilability is potentially

important to the pair because it places in contraposition two common

social values, namely, the general (total) welfare versus justice (equality).

Second, although turn taking is necessary to approach equality of

outcomes, exact equality requires a special ratio of turns favoring A over

B; for example, for equality to prevail in the 4:8 pattern there must be a3

to 2 trade off between the 12, 4 (CC) and 0, 12 (CD) cells. The resulting

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

average joint score of 14.4 is to be compared with 16 in the MJP cell. (It isa

simple mathematical fact, but perhaps of social psychological importance, that the most efficient turn taking is one that involves a trade off

between the MJP cell and another cell in which the person disadvantaged

in the MJP cell has the greatest advantage. So for an equal-share, optimal

joint-profit exchange the party favored in the MJP cell must be willing to

move to another cell that he likes least, that is, from the 12, 4 cell to the 0,

12 cell rather than to the 4, 8 cell in the 4:8 pattern in Figure 4.3.) As the

MFC component becomes relatively more important, the need for turn

taking as a means of approaching equality is reduced and, of course, with

high MFC each person needs only induce his partner to exercise his fate

control benevolently.

Combinations of BRC and MBC

With the addition of MBC to BRC shown in Figure 4.4 we generate

patterns that vary in the degree of interdependence. Interdependence is

maximal at the top of the figure where the BRC is minimal, whereas at the

bottom of the figure, with pure BRC, there is, of course, no interdependence at all. The pure BRC pattern, like the MFC, has an intermediate degree of correspondence. Figure 4.4 will be recognized as corresponding to the MBC branch of Figure 4.2. (Again the two right columns of matrices share the same correspondence values. Their relative

positions in the figure reflect a correction for the frontier values, described

in Chapter 5.)

On the right side of Figure 4.4 are patterns based on correspondent

MBC in which the two persons have the same preferences regarding their

joint activities. The various patterns reflect whether the BRC preferences

promote the commonly desired coordination by concordance with the

MBC pattern or whether they interfere with it because of a discordant fit.

It can be seen that all the concordant combinations contain one mutually

preferred cell and that the advantage of this cell in relation to the next best

one (in terms of mutual preference) increases with increasing BRC. Thus

with increasing magnitude the BRC component reduces the necessity for

the pair to coordinate between two good, mutually preferred sets of

activities. For lower degrees of BRC (upper portion of the figure) it

provides a means of solving the coordination problem by having each

person follow his own RC preferences. There is probably some low ratio

of BRC to MBC, perhaps 2:10, where there is an optimal “mix” of these

two properties; that is, where there is enough BRC to afford a dependable

basis for coordination but enough MBC to make coordination important

to the pair.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Bese

canem

1 NIN

pealesened

pais)

Cott

SaRAS

SONNY

(Sy .2s ES

Behl bs

Noncorrespondence

Degree of correspondence

Correspondence

Figure 4.4

Combinations of BRC and MBC.

With small magnitudes of BRC the discordant fit reduces the degree of

correspondence and thereby increases the need for alternation between

diagonal cells if equal and good outcomes are to be attained. Following

the BRC brings the pair to mutually low outcomes. Thus with weak

preferences regarding own behavior that conflict with coordination

requirements it is impossible for both persons to attain maximum satisfaction at the same time. Good outcomes can come only by alternation

which requires selective inhibition of the RC factors. This relationship has

been called Hero by Rapoport and Guyer (1966) for the reason that when

both persons are acting according to their RCs a person who then foreDOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

goes his RC advantage (moving from C to D) improves the outcomes for

both but more so for the other person than for himself. As shown in

Figure 4.4, with increasing relative magnitude of the BRC component this

problem disappears and maximum joint outcomes (MJP) become available if each person simply acts on his RC preferences. Once again there

appears to be some low-to-intermediate ratio of BRC to MBC in which the

psychological properties of Hero are optimal. In the neighborhood of 4:8

there is, on the one hand, a fairly strong basis in RC for each person to

make the C choice and, on the other, sizable negative consequences for

both person’s doing so (MJP cell versus next best cell is large).

When the MBC component is noncorrespondent, the BRC component

will be concordant for one party and discordant for the other. In Figure 4.4

the concordance has been created for person A who controls the columns.

If both persons follow their RC preferences, their actions converge on the

outcome A prefers. Like the comparable patterns of MFC and MBC in

Figure 4.3, these noncorrespondent patterns

are characterized by

irreconcilability between maximum joint outcomes and equality of outcomes. As in the MFC + MBC patterns, this conflict between MJP and

equality is sharpest for patterns with ratios around 4:8 to 6:6. The

difference between the two sets of patterns is in which person is in a

position to shift the pair between the two cells providing optimal tradeoff.

Here it is the person who is advantaged in the MJP cell, whereas for the

patterns in Figure 4.3 it is the disadvantaged person. (In asymmetrical

MBC patterns with noncorrespondence,

also characterized by this

irreconcilability, either party can make the move necessary for optimal

tradeoff. In the BRC + MFC asymmetrical combinations in Figure 4.5

that are characterized by irreconcilability it is the advantaged person who

must provide the optimal tradeoff.)

Combinations of BRC and MFC

Some of the specific patterns generated by combining MFC with BRC in

various degrees and ways are shown in Figure 4.5. The ratio of BRC to

MFC decreases as we move toward the top of the figure. Figure 4.5

corresponds to the MFC branch of Figure 4.2. With symmetric components MFC can be combined with BRC in only three ways. The results

are shown from left to right for the combinations discordant for both A

and B, concordant for A but discordant for B, and concordant for both.

The two patterns at the extreme left and right are those in which the two

components are equal. In the left pattern, which is one of perfect noncorrespondence, the degree of BRC (cost to each person) is just sufficient

to offset the degree of MFC (reward he delivers to his partner). This yields

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

(so)

Kaka

oO S

cS)

VAVA

VAVA

BVAVZ

VAVA

ie) >)

Ratio

fon) o

a =a

Degree of correspondence

Figure 4.5

Combinations of BRC and MFC.

a “‘constant-sum” relationship; whatever one person can do for the other

by the benevolent use of his fate control is exactly counterbalanced by

rewards he has to give up or costs he must incur in order to do so. Thus

the total outcome to the pair is constant over the entire matrix. (Obviously

if appropriate values are used the relationship is ‘zero-sum,’ the net

outcome to the pair—the gains of one less the losses of the other—always

being zero, no matter what they do.) This kind of perfectly competitive

relationship is to be compared with noncorrespondent MBC (e.g., Figure

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

4.4), in which case the two persons have similarly strong preferences

regarding the joint activities of the pair but these preferences are totally in

disagreement. Rather than the conflict of interest being caused by the

incompatibility between each person’s RC and his partner’s FC, it arises

from the incompatibility between their BCs. A comparison of the two

reveals that the different patterns have different consequences; for example, they differ with respect to the manner in which equal outcomes

can be achieved. Cells of moderate outcomes exist in the MFC plus BRC

patterns, whereas these outcomes can be obtained only by a regular

alternation procedure in the noncorrespondent MBC pattern.

Similar observations can be made regarding the two types of perfectly

cooperative relationship, the one arising from a concordance between

each person’s RC and the partner’s FC (Figure 4.5) and the other, from

correspondent MBC. The former yields only one jointly best outcome,

whereas the latter involves two such points. This results in different

problems for the pair if they are to attain maximum joint outcome. With

BRC + MFC this requires merely that each one follow his RC, but in the

case of correspondent MBC a joint coordination on one of the best points

is necessary.

The patterns in which MFC is greater in magnitude than BRC are

among the most thoroughly investigated in game research, the bilaterally

discordant one being the Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG) and the bilaterally concordant, the maximizing difference game (MDG). In both (as in

all the patterns in Figure 4.5 in which BRC is greater than zero) each

person has a “dominant” response, that is, an action that, because of the

RC factor, yields him better outcomes no matter what the other person

does. In the case of the PDG pattern, if both choose these dominant

responses, the total outcomes for the pair are the lowest in the relationship. It is the irony of this type of relationship that as each person

pursues his own interest the general welfare of the pair suffers. This

aspect of the pattern seems to be most marked for some ratio of BRC

to MFC intermediate between 6:6 and 0:12, a point we discuss in Chapter 2.

A further property of the PDG is that the dominant response yields the

possibility of gaining a higher score than the other person, which might

be important for someone competitively motivated. The MDG pattern

separates this consequence from the dominant response. In the MDG

pattern the dominant response (C) serves to yield the best possible

outcomes for the pair and the individual but not to maximize the difference between one’s own score and the partner’s. If a person wishes to

try to maximize this difference (i.e., to best his partner), he must incur a

loss to do so, this being equal to the RC. With increasing magnitude of RC

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the degree to which he can surpass the partner decreases so he must

expend more cost for a smaller difference. Thus the set of patterns over

the range of 6:6 to 0:12 provides a means of assessing the person’s desire

to surpass his partner. Their joint use permits an answer to the question:

How much loss will this person undergo possibly to gain more than

his partner? (It is not apparent in Figure 4.5, but by varying the magnitudes of the two components independently (rather than relatively) the

cost can be held constant and the possible difference varied or the

size of the possible difference can be held constant and the cost varied.

The former is accomplished by holding BRC constant and varying the

MFC component, the latter by varying both components simultaneously.)

When BRC is concordant with MFC for one person but discordant for

the other, we have the threat game. This has already been discussed and a

version of it, used in research by Rapoport and Guyer, is described and

analyzed in Figure 2.3. In the center column of Figure 4.5 RC is concordant with FC for B (the row player) but discordant for A (the column

player). His RC makes it desirable for B to make the C choice which is to

their mutual advantage. A’s RC, however, makes it desirable for him to

make the D choice which results in a large outcome for himself and a

relatively small one forB. This, of course, raises the question of equity and

B’s ultimate response to inequitable treatment is to threaten to make his D

move (hence the name of the game). In short, the pattern creates an

asymmetry of roles between A and B. The attainment of high outcomes is

dependent on B’s continuing to play C, whereas the fair division of those

outcomes requires A to alternate in some fashion between his two actions.

Thus ina schematic way the pattern portrays the problem of managing an

exchange of B’s loyalty to the mutual interest for A’s just treatment of him.

This problem has been studied extensively by Thibaut and Faucheux

(1965) in what is essentially an expanded version of the 2 x 2 threat

game.

The properties of the threat game, already described, are obviously

most strongly present at intermediate ratios of BRC to MFC. Person A’s

temptation to exploit B increases with decreasing MFC but B’s unhappiness with such treatment decreases as we move down the scale. Person

B’s ability to threaten effectively probably declines as we move down the

scale inasmuch as there is a decrease in the magnitude of his FC effect on

A and an increase in the RC counter to the negative use of his FC. The

optimal mix of conditions, entailing A’s temptation to be unjust and B’s

ability to pose an effective threat, probably occurs in the range of 4:8 to

6:6 ratios of BRC to MFC. It may be noted that Rapoport and Guyer used

approximately a 1:2 ratio.

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

Combinations of All Three Components

So far we have considered all possible configurations of pairs of symmetrical components, meshed together in all possible orientations. There

still remain to be explored the combinations of symmetric components

taken three at a time. It may be helpful to show how these threecomponent patterns relate to those we have already considered and at the

same time give the reader a more general view of the dimensions and

shape of the subdomain of symmetric-component patterns.

The general outline of the subdomain is shown in Figure 4.6. The three

preceding figures are placed together to forma

solid. Figures 4.4 and 4.5

are joined at the pattern they share (BRC), Figure 4.5 forming the near

surface of the solid and Figure 4.4, the far surface. Then Figure 4.3 is

joined to Figure 4.4 at the two patterns they share (correspondent and

noncorrespondent MBC) and Figure 4.3 is joined to Figure 4.5 at the MFC

pattern. The reader will understand that we are forming a threeNCR MBC

Figure 4.6

Space defined by symmetric component matrices.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

dimensional figure with three of the charts in the interdependence portion of our map of the total2 x 2 domain (cf. Figure 4.2). The MFC branch

forms the near surface, the MBC branch forms the far surface, and the

chart of the total interdependence patterns forms the top surface. This

inverted solid, nearly pyramidal in shape, is balanced on the BRC tip.

Minimum interdependence exists in the lower portion of the solid and

total interdependence exists on the top surface.

Our present interest is in combinations of all three components which

exist in the interior of the solid and are represented on the ‘’mixed’’

branch of our map of the domain. One important fact about these combinations can be observed in Figure 4.2. They include perfectly correspondent and noncorrespondent patterns. In general, if we start with

the combinations of MFC and MBC shown in Figure 4.3 and add a degree

of BRC equal to the MFC component and either discordant or concordant

with

it, we

generate

sets

of perfectly correspondent

and noncorrespondent patterns. If BRC discordant with and equal to the MFC

component is added to the left-hand sets of MFC plus MBC (Figure 4.3),

we obtain perfectly noncorrespondent patterns. If BRC concordant with

and equal to the MFC component is added to the right-hand set, we

obtain perfectly correspondent patterns. Another way to describe these

patterns is as combinations of the two basic types of correspondence and

noncorrespondence that occur in interdependent relations: (a) MBC patterns and (b) equal-ratio combinations of MFC and BRC.

The resulting patterns are shown in Figure 4.7. (The two columns of

matrices on the right are characterized by the same degrees of correspondence, namely, perfect correspondence.) The most notable properties of the patterns are those we have noted before having to do with

whether the MBC or the MFC plus BRC is the more important. Comparing the noncorrespondent or competitive relationships on the left, we

observe that when MBC is predominant (in the upper patterns) each

person is uncertain about what action to take. He prefers to see what the

other person will do so that he can then make the best counteradjustment

to that action. Of course, there is no reason for either person to act first or

to agree on or settle on any joint action. Toward the bottom of the figure,

with increasing MFC plus BRC, this property of the relationship

decreases in importance. Thus in the lower patterns, in which the MFC

plus BRC aspect is predominant, each has a preferred or dominant action

(generated by his RC) and each can take that action because it is better for

him, no matter what the partner does.

The correspondent or cooperative patterns at the right vary in a similar

manner from the upper to the lower ones. With a relatively strong MBC

component there tends to be more than one mutually desirable point of

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

0:0:12 ee

VAVA

Vales

Noncorrespondence

Correspondence

Degree of correspondence

Figure 4.7

Perfectly correspondent and noncorrespondent combinations of BRC, MFC,

and MBC.

coordination. With a relatively strong MFC plus BRC component there is

only one mutually best point which is attained if each follows his RC. The

patterns in which the MFC plus BRC complex is concordant with the MBC

component (on the far right) are superior to the discordant in both

respects. For even low values of MFC plus BRC the RC-maximizing

actions take the pair to what is best for both.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The set of matrices in Figure 4.7 can be visualized in Figure 4.6 as lying

along lines connecting matrices on the front surface with those corresponding at the rear of the solid. The noncorrespondent matrices

extend from point M (the equal-ratio, discordant combination of MFC

and BRC) to point N (noncorrespondent MBC); the correspondent ones

extend from point O (the equal-ratio, concordant combination of MFC

and BRC) to point P (correspondent MBC). The upward slope of these

lines (which the reader is asked to imagine in Figure 4.6) carries an

important implication, mentioned before but emphasized here. This is

that conflict of interest (noncorrespondence) reaches its maximum in the

MFC realm at moderate degrees of interdependence. The same can be said,

of course, with respect to commonality of interest. Correspondence

reaches its maximum in MFC relationships only at moderate degrees of

interdependence. Both conflict and commonality of interest occur with

maximum interdependence only for coordination (MBC) patterns.

We examined a sizable number of the three-component matrices to be

found in the interior of the solid implied by Figure 4.6. Most different

from the two-component patterns summarized in Figures 4.3 through

4.5 are the equal-ratio patterns in which the BRC: MFC:MBC

ratio is

4:4:4, The remaining patterns are blends or intermediate cases having

the properties of various matrices already familiar to us. We do not find

patterns that are ‘better’ versions of those we have already seen. We do

not find, for example, a Prisoner’s Dilemma game that represents the

properties of the PDG to a greater degree or in a clearer manner than the

two-component PDG identified in Figure 4.5. Indeed the three-component patterns most similar to any of the classic patterns (such as the

PDG) seem to be versions of it that are less clear than the two-component

patterns identified. This complex point is considered in Chapter 5.

The equal-ratio, three-component patterns constitute 10 of the 30

two-outcome-level matrices considered earlier. Three of the 10 are the

perfectly correspondent and noncorrespondent patterns in the middle

row of Figure 4.7. The two correspondent patterns reflect different “task

requirements” (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959, Chapter 9). The left matrix

incorporates a disjunctive task requirement: if either person makes the

correct response, both receive the maximum reward. The second represents a conjunctive task requirement: only if both persons make the

proper response do both receive the maximum reward. These patterns

are of special interest when the two response alternatives for the two

persons are the same. Assume that under this condition the two persons

are uncertain which response is correct (eg., which path to take or which

vacation to go on). If the pattern is known to be disjunctive, then it is

desirable for each to make a different response; for example, in searching

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

for their lost child (who is found, of course, if either parent finds him), the

mother and father should take different paths of the two he might have

followed. Under uncertainty, the conjunctive pattern might be called the

blame game, inasmuch as it creates problems of credit and blame for the

pair. The first person to commit himself to a given response requires the

other to follow suit, unless failure is to be guaranteed. Thus the first actor

becomes clearly responsible for the pair’s success or failure; for example,

the one who decides which road to take when the situation constrains the

pair to travel together becomes subject to blame if it is the wrong one.

The two equal-ratio, three-component patterns shown in Figure 4.8

(which are also two-outcome-level matrices) have the same location in

the domain of 2 x 2 matrices but they differ in important ways. Their

differences

derive

from

symmetry

versus

asymmetry

in concordance-—discordance. In both patterns person B is dependent on A’s

making a certain response that is contrary to A’s RC. In the right matrix

the same discordance holds for A’s dependence on B, but in the left matrix

B’s RC preferences are concordant with what A prefers him to do. The left

matrix is the prototype of the threat game described in Chapter 2 and

earlier in this Chapter. The asymmetry of concordance—discordance creates a situation in which B’s preferences promote the conditions under

which A is able to gain high outcomes but B is not. The threat of acting

against his own preferences in order to punish A is the means available to

B to induce A to act contrary to his preference in order to permit B

(sometimes) to obtain high outcomes.

Prototypic threat

Prototypic turn—taking

game

game

Figure 4.8

Two prototypic games.

In the same way that the left matrix is a prototype of the threat game the

right matrix in Figure 4.8 is the most elementary version of a set of more

complex, symmetrical, turn-taking games. Like Battle of the Sexes and

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Hero, this pattern lends itself to coordinated alternation as a means of

enabling each person occasionally to have his high outcome. A contrast is

to be made with the noncorrespondent MBC pattern (upper left matrix in

Figure 4.7) in which an alternation of high outcomes between the two

persons is generated simply by one person alternating his choice while

the other maintains his (much as in the Threat game except that either

person may hold while the other alternates). In contrast, the turn-taking

pattern requires coordinated shifting, both going simultaneously from

a,b, to agb, if mutually low outcomes are to be avoided.

SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE

A basic fact of interdependence is that one person’s dependence provides

a basis for the other’s power. In dependence relationships as we have

described them, person B has power over the dependent one, A, to the

extent that A is dependent. The nature of this power depends on the basis

of A’s dependence, the differences here being reflected, as explained in

Chapter 1, in our terms for these two bases of dependence. With fate

control B can affect A’s level of outcome; with behavior control B can make

it desirable for A to adjust his behavior to that of B. In either case the ease

with which B can exercise the control depends on B’s reflexive control.

The greater B’s RC, the more his behavioral preferences limit his flexibility

in varying his behavior and therefore in exercising control over A. If B has

fate control over

A, then the probable consequences of B’s power depend

on the correspondence or noncorrespondence between their outcomes.

With high correspondence B will tend to enact the behavior that satisfies

A (B’s RC is concordant with his FC over A). With high noncorrespondence B will tend to enact the behavior that yields low outcomes to A (B’s RC is discordant with his FC over A). (These two cases are

illustrated in the upper portion of Figure 4.10.)

In interdependent relationships the mutual dependence results in

mutual power. Each person has power over his partner to the extent that

the partner is dependent. Again the nature of this power depends on the

basis of the partner’s dependence, whether FC or BC. Also, the ease of

using power depends on the RC of its possessor. This is appropriately

illustrated by several versions of the threat game (Figure 4.9). In all three

cases person B may need to threaten A witha

drop in outcomes (achieved

by theb, action) in order to induce A occasionally to give B high outcomes.

In the two-outcome-level pattern in Figure 4.9 (Matrix F) B can produce

the threatened drop at no loss in his own outcomes (assuming A is

persisting with the a, action). In Matrix G, the RC + FC combination from

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

Figure 4.5, B produces the drop in A’s outcomes only by suffering a

similar loss in his own outcomes, and in Matrix H to carry out his threat B

must incur a greater drop in outcomes than the one he produces in A’s.

These three cases represent increasing difficulty in B’s carrying out the

threat action. Social-psychologically, they represent decreasing degrees

to which it will be credible to A that B will back up with action any verbal

threat he makes.

Matrix F

Matrix G

Matrix H

Figure 4.9

Different versions of the threat game.

A different social psychological perspective on the various patterns of

interdependence is provided by considering the problems they pose to

the dependent person or persons. In dependent relations the important

significance of the FC versus BC distinction is that it determines the

problem situation in which a dependent person finds himself. The fact

that a person is dependent means that getting a high outcome is not

wholly under his own control. Thus he is faced with a problem—a

problem involving what if anything he himself must do, what action is

required of his partner, the consequences of that action for the partner,

and the means at his disposal of influencing the partner’s action. The

specifics of these matters are readily seen in the two-outcome-level patterns shown in Figure 4.10. All the matrices are arranged in this figure so

that the dependent person is A, who makes the choice between columns.

For simplicity high outcomes are indicated by plus signs and low outcomes, by blanks. When subject to FC, asin the upper part of the figure, A

is helpless to do anything about his outcome directly. He can only plead

with B to make the choice that will benefit him. The correspondence of

outcomes is such on the right that he may be able to count on success, but

in the left matrix the noncorrespondence makes his prospects seem rather

bleak. When subject to BC, as in the lower pattern, A can obtain his high

outcome by waiting for B’s move (or anticipating it from B’s RC) and then

coordinating with it. On occasions on which he is subject to both FC and

BC A’s problem is a mixture of dependence on B’s action and on his own

coordinating choice.

caine

ested

Figure 4.10

Some two-outcome-level patterns of dependence.

With mutual dependence both actors have problems. Again these are

well illustrated by two-outcome-level patterns (Figure 4.11). The problems may be similar, as in the MBC patterns in which both have the

problem of coordinating with each other or in the MFC pattern in which

each has the problem of inducing his partner to perform the appropriate

action. The latter can be described as exchanging the benevolent use of

fate control. In general, patterns characterized primarily by MFC pose

problems of exchange. In contrast, patterns characterized primarily by

MBC pose problems of coordination. With the mixtures of FC and BC

components in the middle of Figure 4.11 the two actor’s problems may be

similar (as in the turn-taking game) or different (as in the threat game and

the FC, BC pattern), but in every example of these mixtures the problems

are complex.

For any given matrix, as in Figure 4.11, it is not difficult to imagine the

interaction process that is set into motion as the two persons try to solve

their respective problems. (By writing descriptions of A’s and B’s problems for various patterns and then spelling out the probable resulting

scenarios, the reader will see for himself the amazing array of subtle

variations in interaction generated by the simple two-outcome-level matrices.)

A major determinant of this interaction process will be the correspondence or noncorrespondence between the two person’s outcomes

because this determines the degree of compatibility of the solutions to

their problems. When the solutions are compatible, as in cases of high

correspondence, it is easy to imagine how a shared or common problem

emerges with joint attention to fulfilling the intersecting requirements

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

Turn—taking

Threat

FC — BC

Conjunctive cooperative

game

game

game

Noncorrespondent

Correspondent

Figure 4.11

Some two-outcome-level patterns of interdependence.

expeditiously and without mistakes. Correspondent MBC in Figure 4.11

is probably more susceptible to incoordination than the conjunctive

cooperative matrix because it does not profit from a convergence of the

preferences on a single obvious solution. Accordingly, we should not be

surprised to see the development of a crude role differentiation between

the person who quickly takes the initiative and the one who acts more

slowly and imitatively. When the solutions are not compatible, as in

noncorrespondence, we can imagine what each person may attempt to

ensure that his own requirements are met: outwaiting the partner, feinting or faking out the partner, making false promises, proposing selfadvantageous rules, and so on. Circumstances permitting, we can expect

pairs with incompatible solutions to devise ways of extending the interaction and making them partly compatible by turn taking over successive

occasions. In this way, by taking turns in obtaining their respective high

outcomes by coordinated shifting in the turn-taking game, the incompatibilities are reduced and the interdependence is changed. Of course,

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the incompatible requirements may not always be reconciled and the

ultimate adaptation of the dependent person may often be to accept

the nonachievement of his best outcome. These matters are considered

later in relation to sequential transformations and bargaining processes.

To summarize the present discussion, the distinctions we have used in

organizing our map of the 2 x 2 domain reflect the basic ways in which

interdependence structures differ. They obviously have implications for

the process deriving from each structure. Mutuality and degree of

dependence relate to power differences or, putting it otherwise, differences between the two persons in their vulnerability. The properties of

the pattern undoubtedly relate to such things as asymmetries in orientation and attention to the interaction, amount and quality of communication, and allocation of outcomes. The degree of correspondence or

noncorrespondence relates to the amount of conflict of interest in the

relationship and to the rate of cooperation or competition in the emerging

interaction process. The basis of interdependence, whether FC or BC,

specifies important aspects of the problem the dependent person faces in

trying to attain his high outcomes and the means, if any, at his disposal

for solving that problem. In cases of mutual dependence and some degree

of correspondence these distinctions define the problem the pair faces

jointly, the MFC end of the continuum being the locus of exchange

problems and the MBC end, the locus of coordination problems.

The present discussion has focused on the interaction process appropriate to each interdependence matrix. Without making it explicit, we

have assumed for the most part that the pattern is the one that characterizes the effective matrix; that is, most of our comments have assumed

that the matrix under consideration reflects the outcomes that each person is trying to maximize in the course of the interaction. In later chapters

we consider patterns as they relate to the given matrix. In Chapter 7 we

analyze a variety of patterns of

given matrices as settings in which people

learn social rules and values. In Chapter 8 we take up the related issues of

self-expression and -presentation. Given matrices are viewed there as

settings in which individuals can show themselves to be certain kinds of

persons.

Prior Research

It is not our intention to make a thorough review of the research that

relates to our theoretical analysis. Reference to several studies at this

point, however, may serve to indicate the relevance of the distinctions to

the empirical investigation of interpersonal relationships.

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

A study by Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan (1976) suggests how some of the

properties of interdependence patterns may be represented in perceptions of interpersonal relationships. Subjects were asked to rate a

large number of relationships (e.g., siblings, parent and child, business

partners, and political opponents) on a number of semantic differential

scales (e.g., very cooperative versus very competitive, very active versus

very inactive). The results were analyzed by a method of multidimensional scaling to reveal the distinctions the subjects make among

the various relationships. If, as we have argued, the properties of interdependence patterns produce important variations in the interaction

process, we should expect the properties to be reflected in the terms in

which people differentiate relationships. This assumes, of course, that an

entire relationship can be characterized by a single matrix or at least by a

delimited set of matrices. It is obvious that any extensive relationship, as

between a parent and child, encompasses many areas and many kinds of

interdependence. Yet it is possible that a relationship may take its meaning from the one or two interdependence patterns that are most characteristic of its problems and situations.

Consistent with the last assumption, the perceived dimensions of

interpersonal relations derived by Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan correspond for the most part to the matrix properties. “Equal versus

unequal,” best defined by ratings on “exactly equal versus extremely

unequal power,” corresponds to mutuality (versus nonmutuality) of

dependence. ‘Intense versus superficial,” best defined by “intense versus superficial interaction with each other,’’ seems to reflect the degree of

interdependence (or dependence) in the relationship. “Cooperative and

friendly versus competitive and hostile,’” best defined by ‘always harmonious versus always clashing,” is clearly similar to the correspondence

versus noncorrespondence in the relationship. Only our distinction between FC- and BC-based relationships is not clearly reflected in the Wish,

Deutsch, and Kaplan dimensions. They describe their fourth dimension

as ‘socioemotional and informal versus task-oriented and formal.” It is

best defined by a rating scale of “pleasure-oriented versus workoriented.’” Although the matter is not perfectly clear, it may mirror

certain aspects that will indicate whether a relationship primarily involves MBC (coordination) or MFC (exchange). The latter is presumably

more typical of economic or business transactions, and indeed such

relationships are located exclusively in the task-oriented half of the

dimension. Relationships at the socioemotional end of the scale (close

friends, siblings, husband and wife) may prominently involve MBC for

one or both of two reasons: (a) in these relationships specific activities

are often less important than whether they are done together (i.e., in

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

coordination); (b) these relationships commonly involve the sharing

of limited living space and facilities which poses problems of coordination.

Proceeding on the assumption that Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan’s intensity and cooperative-competitive dimensions correspond respectively

matrix

properties

of degree

of dependence

correspondence-noncorrespondence, we used their data to test one of the

implications of the matrix analysis. This is that the variance in correspondence-noncorrespondence will be greater for high degrees of

interdependence than for low. The basis of this expectation is seen in

Figure 4.2. With increasing dependence, either toward interdependence

or dependence, there is, in general, an increase in the differentiation of

the patterns with regard to correspondence—noncorrespondence. When

the data from the two figures in the Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan article are

replotted appropriately, they appear to be consistent with this analysis.

The relationships on the intense side of the superficial—intense scale

show greater variance on the cooperative-competitive scale than do

those on the superficial side. This result is presented not as definitive

but merely to illustrate how the implications of the configurations in

Figure 4.3 might be tested with the sort of data gathered by Wish and

his colleagues; for example, a clear basis for distinguishing MFC-based

interdependence

from MBC-based

interdependence would permit

testing the implication that the maximum dispersion of correspondence-noncorrespondence occurs in relationships of moderate interdependence in the first case but of extreme interdependence in the

second.

The FC-BC distinction is not clear in the Wish, Deutsch, and Kaplan

work, but it has a clear and important parallel in Steiner’s (1972) analysis

of group process. In analyzing the process losses incurred in groups,

Steiner distinguishes between (a) losses from lack of interpersonal coordination, matching, and temporal programming and (b) losses from

inadequate member motivation to make high-quality contributions to the

group (p. 83). The first clearly refers to problems created by MBC. The

second reflects the role of MFC in combination with discordant BRC,.as in

the PDG or the perfectly competitive MFC + BRC pattern. The person

prefers not to enact the behaviors that are desired by other members,

either for reasons of laziness or other cost-avoidance motives or because

alternative behaviors are more rewarding. Steiner’s concern is with the

effects of group size and its relation to these two types of process loss. In

the present context we are interested simply in noting that the two bases

of interdependence provide a theoretical foundation for the two types of

loss he distinguishes.

DOMAIN OF 2 x 2 MATRICES

SALIENT MATRICES

One of our purposes in exploring the domain of 2 x 2 matrices was to

identify the “salient” or landmark patterns which by virtue of their

location in the domain typify certain classes of pattern. In some cases

these patterns stand at a corner of the domain and therefore represent in

the extreme a particular kind of pattern. In others one of these patterns

best typifies a subgroup of patterns by virtue of its central location in that

group.

We merely list these salient patterns and indicate the preceding figures

in which they may be found. Other students of the 2 x 2 matrix will

undoubtedly wish to add to the list, but we find 22 matrices worthy of

note:

Independence

1. Bilateral reflexive control (BRC). Figure 4.4 or 4.5

Interdependence

1. Mutual fate control (MFC). Figure 4.3 or 4.5

2. Correspondent mutual behavior control (CR MBC); Figure 4.3 or 4.4

3. Noncorrespondent mutual behavior control (NCR MBC); Figure 4.3 or

4.4

4. Combinations of MFC and MBC (Figure 4.3)

4.1 Chicken

4.2 Battle of the Sexes

5. Combinations of BRC and MBC (Figure 4.4)

5.1 Hero

5.2 Martyr

6. Combinations of BRC and MFC (Figure 4.5)

6.1 Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG)

6.2 Maximizing difference game (MDG)

6.3 Threat game

6.4 Correspondent (cooperative or constant-difference) game

6.5 Noncorrespondent (competitive or constant-sum) game

. Fate control-behavior control (FC, BC); Figure 4.11

8. Equal-ratio combinations of BRC, MFC, and MBC

8.1 Prototypic threat game (Figure 4.8)

8.2 Prototypic turn-taking game (Figure 4.8)

8.3 Disjunctive cooperative game (Figure 4.7)

8.4 Conjunctive cooperative game (Figure 4.7)

8.5 Noncorrespondent (competitive) game (Figure 4.7)

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Dependence (Figure 4.10)

TPO, NO

1.1 Correspondent

1.2 Noncorrespondent

ZI BERE

The reader who has an understanding of these landmark patterns and a

sense of their locations in relation to one another can be assured of finding

his or her way through the terrain of the 2 x 2 domain.

Properties and

Indices of

Interdependence

Patterns

Dependence and Interdependence, 114

Effect on Dependence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions, 115

Correspondence versus Noncorrespondence of Outcomes, 117

The Definition and Indexing of Correspondence, 117

Correspondence as a Function of the Components, 120

Effect on Correspondence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions:

The Frontier Values, 121

Control over Pair Outcomes, 125

Optimal Patterns and Choice Dilemmas, 129

Acuteness of Choice Dilemmas, 133

ew B oe. ee

heal al

valm=ane-bron| Ses ©

@enifeld at i

>iwt wine TT, 9 |

ip.

ft)

wesbnn wwe. / Lameel? ying

rr’

git hoe R

wet WrTan

va » Wrted

~ ne vitals

inesie

} itis @

Wo rannios

a abremeriiol

Ri waee ? Seta ting

vi siwllian

a4 ‘a

ABSTRACT

This chapter proposes indices for the major properties of interdependence patterns

and describes how they are related to the components of interdependence. This

provides a systematic analysis of what was done intuitively in Chapter 4; namely,

a delineation of the links between the properties of the matrix, on the one hand,

and the components and their interrelations that underlie it, on the other. The

analysis is also propaedeutic to those in Chapters 6 and 7, which show how the

properties of the given matrix govern the necessity for transformations to be made

and how the properties of the effective matrix depend jointly on the components

of the given matrix and the particular transformations made.

The analysis of the bases of correspondence-noncorrespondence reveals the factors

underlying the two persons’ control over their joint outcomes and over the

differences between their respective outcomes, which have implications for the

discussion of the bargaining process in Chapter 10. Last, we give systematic

attention to questions raised in Chapter 4 concerning the particular combinations

of components and their weights necessary for optimal versions of various matrix

games.

We now consider how the important properties of interdependence matrices, described in Chapter 4, may be indexed. An important purpose is to

indicate how these properties are determined by the’ components and

their intermeshing. This analysis serves to suggest, by reference to Chapter 3, the possible social-psychological bases of various aspects of interdependence.

It would be helpful first to remind the reader of the meaning and

derivation of the component weights, their magnitudes and algebraic

signs, first presented in Figure 2.5 and its associated text. Further illustrations of these concepts are provided in Figure 5.1. The matrix there has

been analyzed into the three component matrices and beneath each are

shown the component weights of the two persons. Nonzero components

that yield high values in the upper left-hand cell are given positive signs,

otherwise they are given negative signs. The relations among the signs

indicate what is apparent in the patterning of the components: RC 4 is

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

discordant with FC , because they have opposite signs; the same is true of

RC, and FC,; BC, and BC, are noncorrespondent because they have

opposite signs. Although less obvious the pattern of signs also summarizes the concordance—discordance relations between the MBC component and each of the other component matrices; for example, the

positive BC, is discordant with the MFC component because the high

outcomes of both persons are found in the upper right-hand cell (indicated by FC,, positive and FC,, negative). In what follows we use symbols

for the component weights (RC 4, FC;, etc.) in our formulas to refer to

values that are calculated according to the conventions indicated in Figure

Del,

EIN ING ct

RC,

FC, = —2

BC,

Figure 5.1

Illustration of component weights.

ll 2

DEPENDENCE AND INTERDEPENDENCE

In Chapter 4 we have seen that a relationship may be characterized by

interdependence, both persons being dependent on what their partners do;

dependence, A being dependent on B’s actions but B not so on A’s actions;

or independence, neither person being affected by his partner’s choice.

These properties are readily ascertained by examining the relative magnitudes of the component weights of the interdependence matrix. The

smaller RC, is in relation to FC, and BC,, the more A’s outcomes are

under total or joint control by B.

Ina2 x 2 matrix the variance in A’s outcomes under each of the three

sources of control is proportional, respectively, to RC ,?, FC 2, and BC /2.

From this the proportion of the total variance in A’s outcomes controlled

wholly or partly by the partner can be calculated: Dep, = (FC +

BC 4)/(RC

+ FC? + BC 4). This index of dependence, calculated separately for A and B, provides a generally appropriate characterization of

the dependence properties of the relationship. For the matrix in Figure 5.1

Dep,

=.67 and Dep, =.67. For pure BRC the two values are, respecPROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

tively, .00 and .00, and for pure MFC or MBC they are 1.00 and 1.00. A

case of unilateral dependence results in 1.00 for the dependent person

and .00 for the independent.

Effect on Dependence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions

Here we encounter an example of a general problem that occurs in

characterizing matrices. An index (of some particular property) appropriate for characterizing the entire matrix may not provide a good description of the particular portion that is most important in the persons’ experience of their relationship. This becomes apparent when certain plausible

assumptions about behavior imply that the interaction will encompass

only parts of the matrix. (In Chapter 2 this problem was discussed in

relation to the grand mean. It does not describe the average level of

outcomes obtained in the matrix if the two persons manage to avoid the

poorer ones. We also encounter this problem in the next section in

connection with the “frontier’’ values in the matrix and their relevance for

characterizing its degree of correspondence.) As noted in the preceding

chapter (page 80), our primary purpose in the present analyses is to

characterize the matrix per se, making no assumptions about the behavior

of the two persons and attempting to avoid any confusion between

structure and process. In this and several other instances, however, it

seems useful to point out some of the ways in which their behavior and

interaction process may affect the interdependent persons’ experience

with such phenomena as ‘‘dependence” and “conflict.”

With regard to the experience of dependence, consider the three matrices in Figure 5.2. Intuitively, it is clear that the degree of mutual dependence is higher in Matrix II than in Matrix I. This difference is reflected in

our labels for these two patterns (cf. Chapter 4), described, respectively,

as disjunctive and conjunctive games. Similarly, it appears that B’s

Matrix I

Matrix II

Matrix III

A’'s*weights: +141, =1

ily) ele

Bs *weights7-11, 41,51

het lee les tit al

Figure 5.2

Matrices illustrating the problems of indexing dependence.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

dependence is higher than A’s in Matrix III. Yet an analysis of the matrices

reveals that the absolute values of the components are the same for all

three. As the weights listed below each one show, all three matrices are

equal-ratio, three-component patterns. Thus the proportion of nonreflexively controlled variance for each person is the same in all three

cases, and the index of dependence we have proposed does not differentiate them.

The examples in Figure 5.2 suggest the possibility that in determining a

person’s dependence within certain relationships we need not concern

ourselves with the variance in his outcomes over the entire matrix. On the

assumption that he is strongly oriented toward good outcomes and

knows how to get them, we need only consider the variance in outcomes

he can experience when he takes his most preferred action. If person A in

Matrix III chooses a,, the outcome variance controlled by his partner is

zero; that is, A need not be dependent at all. Similarly, if both A and B

choose their preferred responses in Matrix I, neither will be dependent on

the other.

The circumstances under which the components generate patterns

such as those in Figure 5.2 can be determined from the matrix analysis

shown in Figure 5.1. Person A’s outcomes from his preferred action (a)

are not affected by B’s action because two conditions are fulfilled: |FC 4! =

IBC ,|and the sign of BC , is opposite the sign of the algebraic product of

RC, and FC,. The second condition may be described alternatively in

terms of a ‘‘discordance’”’ between BC, and the cell on which RC, and

FC, converge. This condition is not met for person B; therefore, even

though he has the same general pattern of weights as A, the outcome B

derives from his preferred action depends greatly on A’s action. Person

B’s situation is similar to those of both persons in Matrix II, Figure 5.2.

The psychological implication of this analysis is that in some 2 xX 2

cases the FC and BC acting on a person cancel Out one another's effect.

When equal in magnitude, they produce an even distribution of good

outcomes over one of the person’s response alternatives. If this also

happens to be the choice favored by his RC, the person can ensure himself

good outcomes by following his RC; for example, in Case III of Figure 5.2

assume that A and B are husband and wife and parents of a small child.

Assume further that the husband has three sets of overlapping preferences: (a) he wants his wife to go out (b,), (b) he prefers himself to go

out (a,) and (c) he wants someone to stay home with the child (a,b,anda,b,

are preferred to the other combinations). These preferences generate the

Case III pattern in which, by going out (a,) the husband gets good

outcomes (has two preferences satisfied) no matter what his wife does. If

she also goes out, she satisfies his first preference and if she stays home

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

she satisfies his third preference; meanwhile he satisfies his second preference himself.

CORRESPONDENCE VERSUS NONCORRESPONDENCE

OF OUTCOMES

The single most important property of any matrix characterized by

dependence or interdependence is the degree of correspondence between the two persons’ outcomes. This property specifies the extent to

which their interests in the course of the relationship are the same or

different and implies how smooth or conflictual their interaction will be.

In this section we develop a definition of the concept, suggest an index of

correspondence, and show how correspondence is affected by the components of control.

The Definition and Indexing of Correspondence

What is needed is an index of the distribution of values in the matrix that

will reflect the degree of commonality versus conflict of interest. We can

prescribe certain general properties for the index by reference to certain

basic matrices: (a) The index must be +1.00 for a pure MBC matrix in

which the two persons’ outcomes covary in an identical manner and

—1.00 for one in which they vary in an exact inverse manner. In the first

the two will have commonality of interest in coordinating their actions,

whereas in the second they will be in total conflict about which way to

coordinate. (b) It must take intermediate values for intermediate patterns

of MBC. We shall see what they are ina moment. (c) It must be .00 for pure

MEC matrices, in which the two sets of outcomes bear no relation to each

other; each person is able to raise or lower his partner’s outcomes without

any effect on himself. Thus there is no conflict of interest between taking

the one action or the other, but at the same time there is no convergence

of interest

in what each one should

do. (There

is, of course,

common interest in exchanging the benevolent use of fate control, but

that does not concern us here.) The same condition applies with respect

to pure BRC matrices. (d) For mixtures of correspondent MBC and

MEFC, the index should move from +1.00 to .00 as the ratio of MFC

moves from low to high. Similarly, for mixtures of noncorrespondent

MBC and MEC, with an increase in the ratio of MFC to MBC, the index

should move from —1.00 to .00. The same should also be true of mixtures of BRC and MBC. (These effects are shown in Figures 4.3 and

4.4.)

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Intermediate Degrees of Correspondence for MBC.

The second condition (b)

places an important constraint on our index, but before developing its

implication for the index we must see what is meant by intermediate

degrees of correspondence (or noncorrespondence) for MBC matrices.

The answer is provided by Figure 5.3. Extreme correspondence means

not only that the two persons have the same coordination preferences but

that their preferences are equally strong. Intermediate degrees of correspondence reflect the fact that one person has more stake in the coordination of their behavior than the other. Thus in Figure 5.3 B’s interest

in coordination is not so supportive of A’s preferences in the moderately

correspondent as it is in the perfectly correspondent case. In this sense

their interests are less convergent or less perfectly aligned in moderate

correspondence. Similarly, extreme noncorrespondence reflects not only

different coordination preferences but those that are equally strong. With

a moderate degree of noncorrespondence, although B prefers a different

coordination pattern than A, B is not so strongly opposed as he is with

perfect noncorrespondence. Thus B’s interests are not so totally in conflict

with A’s in moderate noncorrespondence. At the midpoint of the noncorrespondence—correspondence continuum (not shown in Figure 5.3,

although the center matrix is an approximation) B is totally indifferent toa

coordination matter with respect to which A has strong preferences. Note

that this is unilateral dependence, not interdependence! By comparing

this intermediate degree of correspondence—noncorrespondence in MBC

with that represented by MFC we seem to have two kinds of midpoint; at

the first one party is totally indifferent to the other’s actions and at the

second each is concerned only with the partner’s choices.

(Sealy

os =r, 00. IC* = — 60

ES Sy;

es = +.78

os = +1.00

Figure 5.3.

Degree of correspondence-noncorrespondence in pure MBC components.

Index of Correspondence.

It may have occurred to the reader that the

Pearson product-moment correlation between the two persons’ outcomes, calculated over the four cells, would provide a convenient index of

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

correspondence. The treatment of intermediate degrees of correspondence for pure MBC matrices precludes adopting the correlation coefficient

as our index. The reason is that it would yield only three values, +1, 0,

and —1, for the various MBC matrices. Thus in Figure 5.3r = —1.00 for the

left three matrices and r = +1.00 for the two on the right.

An index that reflects more properly the continuous variation in correspondence shown in Figure 5.3 is the following:

Biase tastes

IC =

oO sums

pe ke diffs

In this formula IC refers to the index of correspondence, a2,m, is the

variance of the cell sums, and o%js;, is the variance of the cell differences—the algebraic values when B’s outcome is always subtracted

from A’s. (We use “variance” and a” here to refer to the mean squared

deviation from the mean; i.e., the computed “sample” variance and not

an estimate of a “population” variance.) The index takes a value of +1 if

Osiee, =O, —Lif orum, = 0, and Oif o2.4n, =C7uires. The five values of IC for

the five matrices in Figure 5.3 are, from left to right, —1.00, —.60, —.17,

+.60 and +1.00. For a matrix in the exact middle of the continuum, in

which B has no coordination preference, IC = .00. Thus the index satisfies the first two criteria stated at the outset. The reader can determine

for himself that it also satisfies the third criterion, being .00 for pure

MEFC (or BRC) matrices. It can also be shown that it moves from an

extreme value toward zero as MFC (or BRC) is added in increasing ratio

to MBC.

The more general meaning of the IC index can be shown graphically

(Figure 5.4) in which we plot A’s outcomes against B’s and sketch in with

arrows the sum and difference dimensions of the scatterplot; the lengths

are proportional to the two variance terms. In our IC index the term Gums

reflects the magnitude of the sum dimension of the plot and the term

o*uis¢, reflects the magnitude of the difference dimension. The conflict of

interest is high when the difference dimension is the larger of the two and

commonality of interest is high when the sum dimension is larger. This

representation also suggests that the IC index is appropriate for describing the correspondence of a matrix of any size.

Presenting the IC index in terms of variance of sums and differences

facilitates relating it to the components of interdependence and to different aspects of control over pair outcomes (cf. next section). Alternatively, the index can be understood according to the following formula,

in terms of its relation to the product-moment correlation:

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Gy? Hig A

Here the as refer to the standard deviations of the outcomes of the two

persons. The bracketed term of the equation is 1.00 when the two as are

equal; otherwise it is less than 1.00. In other words, the index reduces the

product-moment correlation in proportion to the amount of difference

between the dispersions of the two sets of outcomes.

Correspondence as a Function of the Components

For 2 X 2 matrices it can be shown that the two variance terms in the

formula for the index of correspondence are related to the components:

Bums = (RC, + FCs)? +(RCy + FC,)? + (BC, +BC,)?]

O sitts =+ [RC geo FC)? + (RCa

PCa) te (BC, = BCA

These equations indicate the conditions under which correspondence

will be positive, negative, or near zero. The IC index will be +1.00; that is,

there will be perfect correspondence when the appropriate pairs of RC

and FC terms are equal and have the same sign (i.e., FC is concordant

with RC) and when the two BC terms are equal and have the same sign

(i.e., when there is correspondent MBC). The equations highlight the two

sharply different cases of perfect correspondence already noted in Chapter 4, one in which the RC and FC terms are zero and the correspondence

is entirely due to the correspondent MBC component and the other in

which the BC terms are zero and the correspondence is entirely due to the

equal and concordant RC and FC terms. Of course there are various

mixtures of the two. Ina

similar manner the equations reveal that perfect

noncorrespondence may reflect noncorrespondent MBC, equal and discordant RC and FC, or mixtures of the two. Unilateral control (e.g., in

which RC, and FC, are equal and large but RC , and FC, are zero) also

yields perfect correspondence or noncorrespondence, depending on the

concordance or discordance between the first two terms. This can be seen

in the lower left panel of Figure 4.2.

The value of IC approaches zero as the difference between the paired

terms (i.e., RC, and FCs, RC; and FC 4, and BC, and BC) become large

or, to put the same point differently, as one of the terms becomes small in

relation to the other. This includes the case of the intermediate degrees of

correspondence in the MBC component in which one person is indifferent to the BC exercised over him. It also includes cases approaching

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

pure MFC (the BRC terms are small) and pure BRC (the MFC terms are

small). The generalization to be drawn here is that neither the cooperative

nor the competitive interests in the dyad can predominate unless the

various “paired’’ component weights in the equations are equal in magnitude.

Computational Form.

The following formula for IC is more convenient

than the one above for computing the value of the index:

2(RC,FC, + RC,FC, + BC,BC;)

IC =

RC,2 + FC,? + RC,? + FC,2 + BC,2 + BC,”

Effect on Correspondence of Certain Behavioral Assumptions:

The Frontier Values

Again we must take note of how the two persons’ experience of a property of their relationship may be partly determined by how they act within

the context of the matrix. If their actions result in their encountering only

limited portions of the matrix, an index characterizing the entire matrix

may not be an appropriate predictor of that experience.

The IC index takes account of the total set of pairs of outcomes available

to the two persons. One might argue that only the higher values for each

person should be considered. The assumption would be that conflict of

interest ordinarily develops only with respect to most preferred outcomes. People do not quarrel over what to do about a set of options none

of them wants or has to take. So perhaps the index of correspondence

should be especially sensitive to the relations between the outcomes for

the cells that are most (or more) preferred by each person. (Of course,

under special circumstances, the two persons may “lock-in” on some set

of options that are considerably inferior to the best, in which case their

experience of conflict might be determined by the properties of the pairs

of suboptimal outcomes. This observation highlights the fact that the

adjustment in the index of correspondence proposed below is based on

particular assumptions about behavior and process that may not be

warranted in all cases.)

The problem at hand is illustrated by Matrices III and IV in Figure 5.4.

Matrix IV has one cell most preferred by both A and B, whereas III showsa

difference in their most preferred cells. Thus, even though the IC index is

identical for the two (+.59), the conflict about what to do might be higher

in III. In fact, it might be even greater than in Matrix II in which the

difference dimension

is larger in relation

to the sum dimension

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Matrix I

Matrix

Matrix III

Matrix IV

A's

outcomes

B’s outcomes

1s = Sk

ICs —= 260

(Ce

Figure 5.4

Illustration of the two dimensions reflected in the index of correspondence.

KT Sess,

Sa eee,

(IC = +.33); the reason is that the same cell is most preferred by both

persons in Matrix II.

These considerations might suggest limiting our attention to only those

cells that each person most prefers, perhaps computing an IC index only

for them. A counterargument, however, suggests the wisdom of some

middle course. In the plot for Matrix III the location of the two upper right

pairs in relation to the lower left pairs (which enter into the IC index) is

probably not totally irrevelant to the amount of conflict the matrix will

create. The lower pairs provide a context within which both upper pairs

are likely to appear pretty good to both persons and the difference between them may seem insignificant. Thus, although we might want our

index to take special account of the upper right pairs, we would not want

to disregard completely their location in the total distribution.

Following this reasoning, we suggest that IC might be corrected by

taking account of the magnitude of o”4i¢¢, computed only for the ‘frontier.” This is the subset of pairs left over after all ““dominated”’ pairs are

excluded. A “dominated” pair is one for which there can be found at least

one other pair that both persons prefer (or one person prefers another

pair and the second person is indifferent between the two). The dominated pairs are shown in Figure 5.4 as filled circles and the frontier pairs,

as open circles.

In addition to computing o7um, and o4i¢¢, for the entire set of points

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

sits is also computed for the frontier subset. The two o7yi4;, terms are

then combined and the resulting value is used as the o%yi;, terms in

computing the index. We refer to this corrected index as IC*.

The question exactly how the two o°4;r,, terms should be combined, that

is, what relative weights they should be given, is probably to be answered

on empirical rather than logical grounds. What is desired is a characterization of the index that is maximally predictive of such phenomena as

degree of perceived and experienced conflict in the relationship. For now

we consider the consequences of a simple averaging in which the two

terms are weighted equally.

In general, compared with the uncorrected IC values, the corrected IC*

values for matrices near the center of the scale are shifted toward the

closer extreme end. This can be seen by reference to Figures 5.3 and 5.4.

The shifting is greater for matrices in the correspondent half of the scale,

the reason being that the frontier values there generally constitute a

smaller subset of the entire matrix. IC* for pure MFC is +.33 and IC* for

the matrix at the very center of the MBC continuum is also +.33. An

important consequence of the correction is seen in Figure 5.4 in which it

will be observed that by the corrected index Matrix III is slightly less

correspondent than Matrix II and markedly less correspondent than

Matrix IV.

Effect of the Components on the Frontier.

Let us consider now the effect of

the interdependence components on the value of IC* by analyzing the

manner in which they determine the shape of the frontier. We have

already seen how correspondent MBC, indicated by both BC , and BC, as

positive or both as negative, contributes to high overall correspondence.

We have also seen how noncorrespondent MBC, indicated by a difference

in signs between BC, and BC;, contributes

to overall noncorrespondence. When we examine the degree of conflict existing at the

frontier points, we find that there is an important difference between the

two similar sign cases. It is the concordance or discordance of the MBC

term with the BRC and MFC terms that affects correspondence by affecting the shape of the frontier. This effect can be shown for the 2 x 2

matrix, although we must admit uncertainty about its generalizability to

larger matrices. Figure 5.5 employs a simple scheme to show the location

in the resultant matrix of the various components. To simplify the illustration we treat the weights of all the components as equal in value and use

Ri =RC,=RC,;, F =FC,=FC;, B =BC, = BC,,.and.0 to. stand: for

zero. What we are interested in is whether the largest sum occurs in one

cell along with a small difference between the outcomes of A and B (a

correspondent frontier) or whether it occurs in two cells with a sizable

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

AY VA

Case III

Case VI

VAVA VE

VA VAVA WAa

Case VII

Case VIII

Case IX

Figure 5.5

Effect of positive versus negative correspondent MBC on differences at

the frontier.

difference favoring A in one instance and B in the other (a noncorrespondent frontier). When both R and F are present and both are

positive (Case I), they make the sum largest in the a,b, cell and the

difference there small; the frontier therefore consists of one point. Adding

positive and correspondent MBC (Case II) only increases for both persons the advantage of the a,b, cell in relation to the other cells. Adding

negative and correspondent MBC (Case III) adds two points to the frontier set, but in neither case will the difference in outcomes be large. When

R and F are both present and F is negative (Case IV), they yield a

constant-sum game (RK and F being equal). The addition of positive and

correspondent MBC (Case V) leaves a,b, and a,b, as the cells with the

largest sums and also with the smallest differences—a no-conflict frontier. In contrast, the addition of negative and correspondent MBC (Case

VI) converts cells a,b, and a,b, into those with the largest sums, and these

have large differences, one favoring A and the other favoring B. Thus

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

negative and correspondent MBC creates a frontier characterized by

conflict. The remaining cases in Figure 5.5 show that this same effect

occurs when F is absent. Again, positive and correspondent MBC maintains a nonconflict frontier and negative and correspondent MBC creates

a frontier characterized by conflict. The reader can readily demonstrate

for himself that the same is true when only F is present.

The generalization suggested by these examples is that if the R and F

factors are discordant or unequal in magnitude, the degree of conflict

at the frontier will depend on whether the correspondent MBC term

is concordant or discordant with them. When R = F and they are concordant, the orientation (sign) of the correspondent MBC term has little

effect, but when F and R are discordant or greatly different in size, the

orientation of the MBC term has a large effect on the frontier. This result

may be compared with that in the section dealing with the index of

dependence. In both cases the concordance-discordance of the MBC

term plays no role in the index based on the total matrix. (Here IC

depends wholly on the BRC-MFC concordance and the correspondence

in the MBC component.) In both cases, however, the concordance—

discordance of the MBC term has an important effect on that part of the

matrix that, granting certain plausible assumptions about behavior

and process, the persons are most likely to experience.

CONTROL OVER PAIR OUTCOMES

In the analysis of degree of correspondence we distinguish two pair scores,

the sum and the difference. The proposed index of correspondence

reflects the relative degree to which these scores vary as the two persons

move over the domain of cells in the matrix. We now consider the degree

of control exercised over them by the two persons. As We discuss later,

this control figures prominently in the problem-solving and negotiation

processes that occur in the dyad.

One of the important consequences of the location of a pattern on the

MFC-MBC dimension (Figure 4.3) is the manner in which the two persons control the pair outcomes; for example, the FC and BC components

determine whether the satisfaction of the common interest (represented

by the sum score) depends solely on one person’s actions, on the sum of

their respective actions, or on their joint and coordinated action. The

problem can be illustrated by Matrix lin Figure 5.6 which portrays a threat

game. The sum and difference scores are indicated in separate derived

matrices. It is clear in this case, which happens to be the most extreme,

that person B totally controls the variance in the sums whereas A totally

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

controls the variance in the differences. In less clear cases, as in Matrix II,

it is possible to calculate the relative degree of control the two exercise

over the two scores. An analysis can be made of the components of the

sum and difference matrices in the same way that we have analyzed the

components of the individual score matrices. It is apparent in Matrix II

that the two persons jointly control the sum score but that each separately

controls part of the difference score.

ai uemras ae

Individual scores

Difference (A — B)

Individual scores

Difference (A — B)

Figure 5.6

Control over sum and difference.

In 2 Xx 2 matrices the degree of control each person exercises over the

sum and difference scores and the degree of control they jointly exercise

can be readily calculated from the components of the matrix. This can be

seen by referring again to the equations for the variance of the two pair

scores:

(ane = [(RC

, +FC ,)? + (RC, + FC))* + (BG, +BC,)7]

O ditts, = ae LORCA

FC ,)* + (RC PC)" IBC

= Bes]

The first of the three terms in each equation specifies A’s control over the

sum and difference. Similarly, the second term specifies B’s control and

the third term specifies their joint control. Thus for Matrix I in Figure 5.6

(RC, +FC,;)? =0, (RCs +FC,)? =144, and (BC, +BC,)? =0, which

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

reflect the fact that the sole contributor to variance in the sum is person B.

Similarly (RC, —FC,)? =144, (RCs —FC,)? =0, and (BC, —BC,)? =0,

which reflect person A’s total control over the difference score. In Matrix

II (BC, +BC;)? =36, where both (RC, + FC,)? and (RC, + FC,)? =0,

indicating that the sum score is entirely controlled by their joint moves

(in a manner analogous to behavior control). The shared control (and

absence

of joint control)

over

difference

is indicated

(RC, — FC,)? = (RC,-— FC,)? =16 and (BC, — BC,)? =0.

These examples make it clear that the pair outcomes may be controlled

in quite different ways in different matrices. Four patterns can be distinguished:

1. Differential Control. One person controls the sum and the other controls

the difference. This is epitomized by the threat game (Matrix I in Figure

5.6) in which B determines how much the pair gets and A determines

the allocation of the total outcomes between the two. If B does not like

A’s division, his only recourse is a threat to modify the total score;

hence the labels for the two positions as “allocator’’ and “‘threatener.”’

2. Unilateral Control. One person controls both scores as shown in Matrix

I of Figure 5.7. This occurs with unilateral dependence; the partner is

dependent on the person who controls the two pair scores.

3. Joint Control. The pair jointly controls both scores. As shown in Matrix

Il of Figure 5.7, this is an effect on the pair scores analogous to behavior

control.

4. Shared Control. Each person independently controls part of each score

(Matrix III of Figure 5.7). There may also be mixed cases, as in Matrix II

(Figure 5.6), in which they exercise joint control over the sum but

share control over the difference. By reference to the equations for the

sums and differences the reader can determine the necessary conditions for the 2 x 2 case (in terms of the relative magnitudes and

intermeshing of the components) for any of these patterns to exist.

The analysis of control relates to our earlier discussion (page 103) of the

problems that each person faces because of his dependence. To the

degree that there is variance in the sum (i.e., with high correspondence)

there is a problem for the pair or group which concerns the common

interest and can be described as one of obtaining high joint outcomes.

Exactly how that problem must be solved depends on who controls the

sum, whether one or both. If both have control, then whether it is joint or

shared is important. If joint, coordination is the means to high joint

outcomes; if shared, the exchange of their respective contributions is the

means to the common end.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Matrix

I: Unilateral control

Individual scores

Matrix II: Joint control

Individual scores

Matrix III: Shared control (PDG)

Individual scores

Difference (A — B)

Figure 5.7

Some of the types of control over sum and difference.

Under high noncorrespondence, as epitomized by the constant-sum

game, there is no group problem but only those of the individuals. This

means that there is considerable variance in the difference score and each

person’s problem is to obtain an outcome advantageous to hiniself or, if

that is not possible, one that is minimally disadvantageous. Again, the

solution depends on who controls the difference score and how it is done.

If the control is shared, each person can merely act in the way that yields

the difference most favorable to himself and hope that his partner will

not. If the control is joint, the problem is one of preventing the partner’s

coordination while somehow managing a coordination favorable to one’s

self. In both cases the person is faced with the necessity of getting as much

as he can for himself and of protecting himself from his partner’s actions.

In the case of intermediate correspondence there is a mixture of group

and individual problems. It seems reasonable to assume that in general

the group, by virtue of the common interest, will find it useful to help

members jointly to achieve solutions to their respective problems; that is,

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

the pair will probably take on the individual problems so that they will not

interfere with the solution of the common problem. Thus both members

of the dyad have an interest in obtaining maximum joint outcomes, but

they are also likely to be concerned with allocation or justice which can be

viewed as derivative of the individual problems present under high

noncorrespondence. Just as in the zero-sum, perfectly competitive relationship, each person is concerned with (a) getting as much as he can and

(b) protecting himself, so it is true in the mixed situation that the pair

has an interest in protecting each person and at the same time keeping

him contented or happy (helping him to feel that he is getting as much as

he can). Systems of justice can be viewed as having to do with (a) providing each person with security against the lower end of his outcome scale

and (b) providing him with a satisfactory or equitable level of gain.

These implications of control over sum and difference scores appear

again in our considerations when, in Chapter 10, the negotiation process

in dyads is analyzed. The manner in which the sum is controlled determines the process of selecting among the frontier values, i.e., those among

which wise participants will attempt to negotiate an agreement. The

control of the difference scores figures importantly in the positions from

which this bargaining will be conducted and in the threats available to the

negotiators.

OPTIMAL PATTERNS AND CHOICE DILEMMAS

At several points in Chapter 4 the question of the optimal versions of

certain patterns such as the PDG was raised. This question brings up two

interrelated issues, the first concerning the optimal number of components and the second the optimal ratio of weights for a given set of

components. We consider the optimal number of components first.

In exploring the three-component matrices, we wondered whether any

of the important patterns noted among the two-component matrices

would be enhanced by the addition of the third component; for example,

is there a better version of Prisoner’s Dilemma or Chicken than those in

Figures 4.5 and 4.3? This question concerns the effect of adding a third

component to the two-component patterns; specifically, whether the

effect is to sharpen or blur the properties of these patterns. If we explore

the regions of the domain adjacent to these patterns, we will observe that

each pattern is maintained only so long as the third component is small;

for example, the Battle of the Sexes is described in Figure 4.3 with a

BRC:MFC:MBC ratio of 0:4:8. (This is a shorthand expression for the

following: IRC,| = [RCg| = 0; IFC,| = IFC,! =4; IBC,| =|BC,! =8.)

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The similar matrices with a ratio of 2:3:7 possess the basic properties of

the Battle of the Sexes, but the matrices witha

ratio of 3:3:6 do not, nor do

matrices in which the proportion of BRC is even higher. This fact is

illustrated in Figure 5.8 which shows the original matrix along with the

three possible variations produced by adding BRC in the three possible

concordant relations with the other two components. In the 0:4:8 matrix

each person prefers doing D while his partner does C but his second

choice is the opposite combination. Their least preferred outcomes occur

when both play D. This set of preferences, hence the basic properties of

the relationship, is maintained with the 2:3:7 ratio but is lost in one

respect or another with the 3:3:6 ratio. Even with the 2:3:7 ratio one or

another property becomes blurred as the gaps between scores at the

successive preference levels are shortened and lengthened. Thus the

addition of the third component, the BRC, first blurs the structure of the

relationship (at low values) and then destroys it altogether (at higher

values).

This point can be made by logical argument, as shown in Figure 5.9 for

the PDG. The basic PDG pattern is described in the upper half of the

LAVA

0:4:8

(BRC : MFC : MBC)

VA,

VAVAleaVAVARVAVA

VAVA

VANS

VAVA

PASC} aT)

or S716

Figure 5.8

Modifications in Battle of the Sexes with the addition of BRC.

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

figure where BRC and MFC are combined in a discordant relationship.

The magnitudes of the RC and FC components are portrayed by the

letters R and F (where F is greater than R) and 0 stands for zero. In the

resulting pattern the four values for each person are ordered in magnitude with (F +R)

>F >R >0. In the lower half of the figure MBC is

added in a concordant orientation to the basic PDG pattern; the increments are indicated by B. We then consider how large these increments

may be without destroying the original rank order of the four cell values

for each person which defines the PDG; that is, what constraints must be

placed

on B if in the new

pattern PDG’

it is still

true

that

(F + R) > (F + B) > (R + B) > 0. The answer is clear from the first comparison: for (F + R) > (F + B) it is necessary that R > B. Thus the MBC

component must be smaller in magnitude than the BRC component if

the PDG pattern is to be maintained. A similar conclusion is reached if

we add correspondent MBC in a discordant orientation to the original

pattern or if we add noncorrespondent MBC to the PDG. (A further

constraint is placed on the magnitude of B by the usual criteria for the

ordering of the cellsums in the PDG: 2F >(F +R +0) > 2R. For this to

be true when correspondent BC is added concordantly or discordantly F

must exceed R + 2B which requires that B be less than 1/2(F — R).)

The above conclusion is reached for all the unequal ratio, twocomponent

patterns

mentioned

earlier,

that

is,

the PDG

(MFC + BRC), MDG (MFC + BRC), Chicken (MFC + MBC), Battle of

(EPR)

SF SRS 0

For (F+ R) > (F +B) > (R+B)>0

R must be greater than B

Figure 5.9

Analysis of the effects of adding MBC to the Prisoner’s Dilemma game.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Sexes

(MFC + MBC),

Hero

(MBC + BRC),

Martyr

(MBC + BRC). In all these cases the ordinal relations among the outcomes present in the two-component version are maintained with the

addition of the third factor only if that factor is smaller in magnitude than the

lesser of the original factors. Thus, for example, Figure 5.10 shows that BRC

can be added to Chicken without changing the basic pattern if it is smaller

in magnitude than the MBC component in the orginal version.

The preceding analysis suggests that the two-component versions of

any one of the “‘classic’’ games lies at the center of the subdomain of

patterns satisfying the rank-order requirements of that game. As we add

the third component we move toward the boundary of the domain and

beyond a certain magnitude the additional component shifts the pattern

into a different subdomain altogether. Similarly, in considering the patterns generated by successive shifts in the ratios of the two components

(see Figures 4.3 through 4.5), it seemed that a given game was best

presented by an intermediate ratio (e.g., BRC and MFC ina

ratio of 4:8 for

the PDG). Can it be asserted, then, that the two-component patterns with

certain ratios are optimal versions of the various games?

A first argument in support of this assertion can be made from the

perspective of the confusability of various patterns. If a particular game is

defined by a certain preference ordering among the person’s four outcomes, then that game exists in its clearest form when the differences in

outcomes between successive members of the preference order are equal;

for example, in Figure 5.8 the 0:4:8 version of the Battle of the Sexes has

each person’s preferences equally spaced. This preference ordering of

first, ownD, other’s C, second, own C, other’s D, third, bothC, and fourth,

both D, is represented by the regular descending outcome sequence of 12,

8, 4, and 0. As we have noted the addition of BRC tends to destroy this

ordering; for example, mapping it onto the irregular outcome sequence of

12, 7,3, and 2 witha small amount of BRC and wholly eliminating certain

aspects of the order with larger amounts (e.g., the sequences 12, 6,3, and

3 or 9, 9, 6, and 0). A glance at Figure 4.3 will also make it clear that the

0:4:8 Battle of the Sexes is the particular two-component version that

yields the regular, evenly spaced sequence of outcomes. (Compare the

4:8 Battle of the Sexes with the 2:10 pattern below it.)

The argument here is essentially a perceptual one. In terms of the

clarity of the person’s preference ordering, which version of a given game

is least confusable with adjacent games? It seems reasonable to assume

that if the outcome difference representing a given step in a person’s

preference order is small, he will occasionally overlook it or regard it as

unimportant. If so, on these occasions he will be locating himself in a

different interdependence pattern. The patterns least susceptible to such

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

errors or confusions are the two-component patterns with two-to-one

ratios, as indicated in Figures 4.3 through 4.5. (The threat game represents a different case and is not to be included in this generalization.)

These “best” patterns are, of course, those identified in Rapoport and

Guyer’s analysis of matrices in which each person’s preferences are

described simply in terms of rank order. The implication of the present

discussion is that the best patterns are those in which these ranks represent evenly spaced outcome values.

Acuteness of Choice Dilemmas

A second argument can be made for the optimality of the twocomponent, two-to-one patterns. This is based on a consideration of the

nature of the choice dilemma that confronts an actor ina given game. The

basic idea is that the number and magnitude of components affect the

acuteness or sharpness of the dilemma a person faces. Again, the dilemmas seem to be most acute for the particular two-component patterns

mentioned above.

Consider the PDG. Referring to the top portion of Figure 5.9, the

difference (F +R) —F

is often referred to as the ‘‘temptation” to make

the D response; R — 0, as the “risk” involved in making the C response;

and F —R, as the “gain” to be achieved by cooperative exchange of C

responses. In the simple two-component PDG “temptation” and “‘risk’”’

are both equal to R and “gain” is equal toF — R. WithF = 2R (as in the

4:8

version)

all three

terms

equal.

In other

words,

temptation = risk = gain when the four outcomes (F + R, F, R, and 0) are

equally spaced, and this is true only for the 1:2 versions of the PDG.

The dilemma in the PDG is that you have one action that is better no

matter what your partner does (represented by the temptation and

avoidance of the risk), but if you take that action and your partner does

likewise, you do more poorly than if you both had done otherwise

(represented by loss of the gain). It seems reasonable to assume that the

dilemma is most acute when these two considerations exactly offset each

other, that is, when the temptation (and risk avoidance) incentive favoring the D response is exactly as strong as the gain incentive favoring the C

response. It will be clear by now that this is true for the 4:8 version of

PDG.

It may be asked why it is necessary for the temptation (F + R) — R to

be equal to the risk R — 0. (This equality requires that MBC be zero.) The

answer lies in the unbalancing of one side of the dilemma that their

inequality introduces. The side of the dilemma favoring D is made up of

both approach and avoidance motivation—to achieve the benefits repINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

resented by the temptation and to avoid the penalties represented by the

risk. The optimal (4:8) version of the PDG has the two incentive properties represented equally in the set of considerations counterposed to the

gain. Other versions accentuate one of these properties in relation to the

other; for example, in the lower part of Figure 5.9, with the concordant

addition of MBC, the temptation is reduced and the risk is increased. The

reader can determine for himself that a discordant addition of MBC

increases the temptation and decreases the risk. The addition of noncorrespondent MBC increases temptation and decreases risk for one

person but has the opposite effect for the other person. Thus, with the

added MBC component, a person’s choice becomes primarily defined by

the temptation versus the gainor by the risk versus the gainor one way for

one person and the other way for his partner.

A similar argument can be made for the game of Chicken—that the

0:8:4 ratio creates the most acute dilemma for each person. Here, however, there is the interesting special fact that the dilemma facing an actor

depends in part on the acuteness of the conflict he can create, by his

choice, for his partner. Chicken is shown, schematically and in several

versions, in Figure 5.10. The basic game pattern is defined by the following preference order: first, own D and other’s C; second, both C; third,

ownC

and other’s D; and fourth, both D. This order can be constructed by

using only MFC + MBC, MFC being the larger term (Matrices I and II). In

these cases, in which BRC is absent, if required to make a choice without

knowing his partner’s choice the person has no clear basis for deciding

betweenC and D. If, however, he knows what his partner has chosen, the

MBC term provides a basis for choice. Similarly, if he can choose first and

make his choice known to his partner, he can provide him with a basis for

choice. The latter is a particularly attractive possibility because by choosing D and letting his partner know it he can provide him with an incentive

to choose C, which would result in his own highest outcome. It is because

of this possibility that Chicken is described as a preemption game.

Preempting the D action—taking it irrevocably and notifying the partner

of this fact—is a means of attaining one’s best outcomes.

Chicken is a special preemption game, however, (others are Battle of

the Sexes and Hero). As suggested by the situation from which it takes its

name it provides a setting in which a person may demonstrate his courage.

This reflects the fact that the dilemma for the prospective preemptor is

whether to play it (relatively) safe withC

or to take a chance withD. Foran

early commitment to D to constitute a display of courage it is necessary

that the payoff matrix have two properties: (a) There must be no basis for

choice other than the differential riskiness of the two alternatives. This

means that no other interpretation can be placed on the D choice than that

PROPERTIES AND INDICES OF INTERDEPENDENCE

MFC + MBC

Matrix |

Matrix

Matrix

VAVA a WV

VAVA

0:8:4

0:10:2

0:6:6

Matrix IV

Matrix V

Matrix VI

Jay es Ay,

VAVA Ave VA

1:7:4

BET ES:

3:6:3

Figure 5.10

The game of Chicken and several variations.

of risk taking. This precludes an RC favoring the D choice because other

people might simply infer that its choice represents what is on the average, the better bet. (b) There must be no clear basis for predicting the

partner’s response

to the preemptive move.

This means

that the

preemptor must be taking his action under maximal uncertainty. If made

with assurance that the partner will reciprocate the D, we would describe

the preemptive move as foolish, and if made with assurance the partner

will respond with C we would simply describe it as obvious or “showboating.”

The latter creates the interesting point in the analysis. Uncertainty for the

preemptor depends on the acuteness of the conflict in which his action places the

other party. Person A’s uncertainty about the outcome of his preemptive

action will be maximal if the other person has no obvious response to

make but rather is placed in sharp conflict between complying and resisting; for example, in Matrix I, Figure 5.10, ifA preemptively chooses D, the

partner can get either 4 or 0. His conflict about what to do would seem to

depend on the magnitudes of these outcomes in relation to the8 that might

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

have been attained with mutual C choices. The 4 is considerably lower

than 8 but also considerably better than 0. His conflict will be marked. In

contrast, faced with the same situation in Matrix IL, after comparing the 2

with the 10, he is likely to conclude that he might as well take the 0. In

contrast, in Matrix III he is likely to conclude that because the 6 is what he

might have obtained anyway it is clearly preferable to 0. In the last two

cases his conflict is less than for Matrix I. This reasoning suggests that the

partner’s uncertainty about what to do is greatest when B falls exactly half

way between F and 0. Thus it should be true that F — B = B — 0 or that

F = 2B. If we impose the additional condition suggested by (a), that there

be no RC

the preemptor,

it must

further

true

that

(F + B) —F =F —B. Thus, the two conditions are best satisfied when

the four ordered outcomes are evenly spaced from highest to lowest. The

lower matrices in Figure 5.10 shows that the addition of BRC concordant

with the MFC disrupts the equal spacing.

Logical Analysis of

the Transformation

Processes

Operations on Own and Other’s Outcomes, 140

Maximize Other’s Outcomes, 141

Maximize Both Own and Other’s Outcomes, 142

Maximize Own Advantage, 144

Minimize Difference, 145

Nonlinear Transformations Involving the Comparison Level, 148

Transpositions of Cells in the Given Matrix, 151

Double Transpositions, 154

Averaging over Successive Occasions, 155

The Consequences of Sequential Transformations, 156

The Choice Among Sequential Transformations, 159

Sequential Transformations in the Service of Outcome Transformations, 163

The Consequences of Repeated Play, 163

ABSTRACT

This chapter examines the shifts in matrix pattern generated by applying various

mathematical operations and sequential rules to given patterns. Only certain

plausible transformations, corresponding to common values and temporal concepts, are investigated. These include cases in which the person (a) gives some

direct weight to his partner’s outcomes in his decision-making criteria (outcome

transformations), (b) attempts to be the first or second to act on a given occasion

out of regard for how the choices are changed for the second actor (transpositional

transformations), and (c) adopts a policy governing his successive choices over a

series of interactions in the given matrix (sequential transformations). The

several transformations are analyzed for the effect they have on the patterns of

interdependence and, therefore, such things as the components of the pattern, the

correspondence or noncorrespondence of outcomes, and each person’s basis for

choice.

We now consider how a particular 2 x 2 matrix can be transformed and

the consequences of the various transformations for the pattern of interdependence that results. Transformations are made possible by the pattern of outcomes in the given matrix. Psychologically, they are the ways in

which a person can reevaluate or reconceptualize the given matrix. In

doing so, he no longer responds to his own outcomes in each cell.

Instead, he views these outcomes in the contexts provided by his

partner’s outcomes and by past and future actions and interactions within

the relationship.

When a person takes account of his partner’s outcomes, he is able to

adopt new criteria for making decisions and evaluating their consequences; for example, he can make it his goal to cause both sets of

outcomes to be as high as possible. In effect, by adopting this criterion he

is acting as if the matrix were something different than the given one. We

refer to these new criteria as social or personal values and describe this

type of transformation as an outcome transformation.

A second possible consequence of considering the total pattern of

outcomes is that the person can recognize the importance of the timing of

events in any interaction; for example, the pattern of outcomes may

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

indicate that a person who “goes first’ is more likely to get a high

outcome than one who waits and lets the other go first. The person who

recognizes the benefits of “preemption” and acts on this insight is effectively operating within a different matrix than the given one—a matrix

within which the choices for the second actor are redefined and in which

the values reflect a transposition of those in the given matrix. We refer

to this modification of the given matrix as a transpositional transformation.

When a person takes account of past and future interchanges, he can

adopt a policy of varying his choices over successive occasions; for

example, when he and his partner obtain their respective highest outcomes from different combinations of actions, an alternation of his

choices over successive times may make it possible for both equally,

though only occasionally, to enjoy these high outcomes. In considering

such policies, the person is in effect making choices within a new matrix,

one in which the alternatives are various sequential rules and the outcomes are the long run (or average) consequences of their various combinations. This kind of modification of the given matrix is described as a

sequential transformation.

Logically, transformations can be represented by three different operations on the given matrix, corresponding to the three transformational

phenomena outlined: (a) mathematical operations on own and other’s

outcomes corresponding to various outcome transformations; (b) transpositions of cells in the matrix corresponding to the consequences of

preemptive action; and (c) averaging values over portions of the given

matrix representing the consequences of combinations of sequential

rules. We now consider each of these in turn. We analyze the way in

which each of these operations affects the properties of the given matrix;

that is, how the effective (transformed) matrix relates to the given one. In

Chapter 7 we consider the more specific consequences of these transformations and treat the actor as a policy setter, choosing among different

transformations and evaluating their consequences. We also determine

how, for various patterns, certain transformations induce easy and

mutually satisfying decisions, whereas others either worsen or do not

improve intrapersonal and interpersonal conflict.

OPERATIONS ON OWN AND OTHER’S OUTCOMES

The research of McClintock and his colleagues, discussed more fully in

Chapter 7, suggests that people may have preferences not only with

respect to their own outcomes but also to their partner’s (other’s) outcomes, the joint outcomes (own and other’s), and the relative outcomes

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

(one’s advantage in relation to the other’s outcome). The mathematical

Operations we consider here include these three criteria along with a

fourth that relates to justice—a preference for minimal difference between own and other’s outcomes.

Maximize Other’s Outcomes

The simplest social criterion that a person may apply in his actions is the

altruistic one of maximizing his partner’s outcomes (max other). In the

effective matrix his outcomes are those of his partner in the given matrix. It

is apparent that he now becomes subject to the same sources of variation

in his outcomes as his partner in the given matrix, except that their

meaning is somewhat changed for him. Assuming that B adopts the max

other criterion (using primes to indicate the component weights of the

effective matrix), then BC’;=BC,, but RC’,;=FC, and FC’;=RC,,. In short,

what was fate control over A now is reflexive control for B and what was

reflexive control for A now is fate control over B. This will be intuitively

obvious to the reader: if I totally identify with my child and his outcomes

become my own, then ways in which I exercised fate control over him

become ways in which I affect my own outcomes, and ways in which he

exercised reflexive control over himself now become ways in which he

exercises fate control over me.

It will also be intuitively clear that if B unilaterally makes the max other

transformation (while A maintains an interest exclusively in his own

outcomes), the effective matrix becomes perfectly correspondent. As A’s

given outcomes are larger or smaller, so are B’s effective ones. This follows

from the fact that RC, becomes FC’;, FC, becomes RC’;, and BC,

becomes BC’s. The reader will recall that the index of correspondence is

+1 when RC, = FCs, RCg = FC,, and BC, = BC,z.

If both persons adopt the max other criterion, the various components

simply switch places as indicated by the arrows in Figure 6.1. There is no

change in the degree of correspondence because the pairs of RC and FC

terms and the two BC terms remain the same. The pattern, however, may

change in degree of interdependence as the magnitude of RC relative to

the other components increases or decreases. The consequences of these

shifts can be seen most readily by referring to figures in Chapter 4. The

interchange of the RC and FC terms means that matrices in Figure 4.5

reverse their position in relation to the horizontal medial axis of the array.

Thus PDG and the matrix directly below it exchange positions as do MDG

and the one directly below it. The three matrices on the horizontal axis

(competitive, threat, and cooperative) remain unchanged. In Figures 4.3

and 4.4 the consequence of the RC-FC interchange is to exchange beINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Components

Given matrix:

RCy,

RCg;

FCy,

FCp;

BC,,

BCpz

Transformed matrix:

Fei,

Eee,

BC,,

BC,

Figure 6.1

Relation of transformed components to given components with mutual max

other transformation.

tween the two figures matrices located in similar positions. Thus Chicken

becomes Martyr and vice versa; Battle of the Sexes becomes Hero and vice

versa, and, of course, MFC becomes BRC and vice versa. In brief, mutual

max other leaves the degree of correspondence unchanged, but if the

initial balance of RC and FC is unequal it shifts the matrix up or down on

the independence-interdependence scale. The latter effect is caricatured

by the pair of persons who, on becoming closely identified with each

other, find themselves being wholly affected (MFC) by what earlier had

been independently controlled sources of satisfaction (BRC).

An important aspect of the max other transformation is that a person

may have greater RC than before. This depends, of course, on his

partner’s FC and how it compares with his own given RC. In patterns such

as the Battle of the Sexes the criterion provides a person with RC where he

had none before.

Maximize Both Own and Other’s Outcomes

A more complex but also more common criterion is that of maximizing

both one’s own and one’s partner’s outcomes, referred to as max joint. The

person can give different weight to the two sets of outcomes by, for

example, placing more emphasis on his own than his partner’s. Considering the simplest case in which he weights them equally, the component weights for the transformed matrix become (for B):

RC’, = RCs + FC,

FC’; = FC, AP RC,

BC’, = BC, Tr BC,

In other words, added to B’s own components are the appropriate ones of

his partner. The same is true for A’s components.

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

In mutual use of the max joint criterion the following equalities prevail:

REY = FC’; = RC, ar FC,

FC’, = RC’, = RC, + FC,

BOYS =BC'5 =BC, + BC,

These are summarized in Figure 6.2, which shows the pair of given terms

combined to form each transformed term. The equalities between pairs of

terms in the transformed pattern show that the relationship is perfectly

correspondent. This is intuitively obvious. If both persons take equal

account of both sets of given outcomes, their respective transformed

outcomes will be identical in each cell.

Components

Given matrix:

RC,4,

RCp;

FCy,

FCy;

BC,,

BC,

Transformed matrix:

RC,,

RCp;

FCz;

BC,,

BC,

Figure 6.2

Relation of transformed components to given components with mutual max

joint transformation.

Intuitively, it seems that unilateral adoption of the max joint criterion will

increase the correspondence between the outcomes of the two persons.

Thus, as he applies this criterion, B’s outcomes vary to a greater extent

than originally with the same factors (A’s choices, B’s choices, their joint

choices) as do A’s outcomes. In general, this is true. There are exceptions,

however, that can be understood by referring to the case of perfect

correspondence shown in Figure 6.3. Although in the original matrix

IC = +1.00, the IC for the transformed matrix is +.80. The reason is that

the variance in A’s outcomes increases sharply. Because the IC is equal to

the correlation reduced by any inequality between the dispersions of the

two sets of outcomes, the increased variance in A’s outcomes reduces the

correspondence. The psychological meaning is that although A andB still

share the same preference ordering for the four possible events, the

correspondence between the preferences is reduced by the fact that A

cares so much more than B that better outcomes be attained. A rough

generalization about the unilateral use of the max joint criterion is that it

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

increases the degree of correspondence if the correspondence is not too

high in the given matrix.

Although the mutual max joint transformation always yields perfect

correspondence, it has drastically different effects on the degree of interdependence, depending on the given matrix. As was true of the max other

criterion, the use of max joint can produce RC where there was none

originally. Illustrations are provided by MFC, Battle of the Sexes, and

Chicken. The threat game becomes a pattern of unilateral dependence in

which B is in control of both RC, and FC ,; this simply reflects B’s control

over the sum score in the orginal matrix. Perfectly noncorrespondent

games have no variance at all in their transformed versions, which is

another way of noting that perfectly noncorrespondent games are

constant-sum patterns.

Given matrix

Transformed matrix

Figure 6.3

Matrix

for which

the max

joint

transformation

reduces

degree

correspondence.

Maximize Own Advantage

This competitive value transformation can be represented in its simplest

form by the algebraic difference (own-other). We refer to it as the max rel

criterion, remembering that the difference (meaning ‘own relative

advantage’’) is positive if own outcome is larger than other’s and is

negative if other’s outcome is larger than own.

The components of the transformed matrix are calculated by making

proper subtractions among the terms for the given matrix:

RC’, =s RC, a. FC,

RC’; = RC, =z FC,

FC) = FC, = RCs,

FC’, = FC, = RC,

Be. = BC, = BC,

BC’; = BC, Foe BC,

It will be seen that RC’, = —FC’,;, FC’, = —RC’;, and BC’, = —BC’,.

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

Thus the matrix resulting from a mutual max rel transformation always

has a perfectly noncorrespondent pattern.

This transformation is, of course, a mirror image of the max joint

transformation. Not only does its mutual use lead to noncorrespondence

(where max joint leads to correspondence) but its unilateral use generally

leads to increased noncorrespondence (just as unilateral max joint generally results in increased correspondence). The exceptions to this

generalization are similar to those applying to max joint usage. Unilateral

max rel use increases the noncorrespondence only if the initial degree is

not too extreme.

The effects of the max rel criterion on interdependence also provide a

mirror image of those for max joint. Perfectly correspondent given patterns

have no variance in their transformed versions, reflecting their constant-difference property. Thus the correspondent MBC terms drop out

for such patterns as Chicken and Hero. For given patterns with noncorrespondent MBC the transformation enhances the term. The threat

game again has unilateral dependence, but this time A controls both

terms, reflecting his control over the difference scores in the given matrix.

Like the other criteria considered so far, max rel can generate RC for a

person who has none in the given matrix.

Minimize Difference

Persons interested in justice might place a negative value on any difference between the outcomes of the two persons. Thus they would

attempt to minimize the absolute difference, own-other’s. The larger the

difference, the larger the negative transformed value.

The relations between the given components and those of the pattern

resulting from the min diff transformation are exceedingly complicated: let

A= RC,

FC,

B = FC, — RC;

@ = BC (BG;

D =GM,-— GMgs

Then

RC’,

= FC’, =1/4(|A +B +C+2D|+/A

—B —C +2D|-|B—A—C+2D|

BAD:

FC’,

= RC’,

= 1/4(IA+B+C+2D|-|A—B-—C+2D\+I|IB-A

—C+2D!\-!IC

—A —B +2D)),

BC’, = BC’; = —1/4 (|A + B +C + 2D| —|A —B —C + 2D|-|B-A-C

PSD) Cia

p een):

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Several aspects of the min diff transformation may be noted. The first is that

the mutual use of the min diff criterion results in a perfectly correspondent

pattern, revealed by the paired equalities among the terms of the transformed pattern.

Second, the grand means of the two sets of given outcomes affect

the components of the transformed matrix. This, of course, reflects one of

the sources of differences between the scores of the two persons. The

greater the degree to which one person is generally more favored in the

given outcomes of their interaction, the larger the negative outcomes for

whomever applies the min diff criterion.

Third, a difference between the two persons in their total variance in

outcomes contributes to all three components of the transformed pattern.

This is apparent from the fact that the first term A +B +C + 2D

increases the value of all three transformed components. This term is

partly a function of the difference between the sums of the original

components of the two persons. The effect of this difference in variance

may be offset by the difference between the means, but if the mean

difference is close to zero the difference in variance acts to increase all

three derived components. The psychological significance is that minimal

differences between the two sets of outcomes are possible only if the two

persons are affected to about the same degree by the different combinations of their behavior. On the one hand, a person who is greatly

pleased by all events in the interaction will inevitably have different given

outcomes from his partner who is rather indifferent to all the events (the

effect of a mean difference). On the other hand, a person who is highly

responsive, with both pleasure and displeasure, to the different events

will have different outcomes froma

partner who is only mildly responsive

(the effect of a variance difference).

Fourth, independently of the similarity or dissimilarity between the

means and variances of the two persons’ outcomes, the degree of correspondence or noncorrespondence between them affects the components of the transformed pattern. (This is readily determined by comparing noncorrespondent and correspondent ranked-outcome patterns

because all such patterns have the same mean and variance.) In Chapter 5

we saw that correspondence is maximal when the pairs of components in

the given matrix (RC ,and FCs, RCg and FC ,, BC, and BC) are equal and

have the same signs. Noncorrespondence is maximal when the pairs are

equal and opposite in sign. Referring to the first equations (page 145), the

reader will see that in the first case each of the

A, B and C terms is zero; in

the second case they have values, respectively, of +2RC,, +2FC,, and

+2BC ,. Substituting these values in the equations for the transformed

components and, for simplicity, assuming that GM , = GM,, we find that

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

the transformed components are zero for the first case (correspondent

given matrix) and nonzero for the second (noncorrespondent given matrix). The first is merely another manifestation of the fact that a perfectly

correspondent matrix is also a constant-difference game and there can be

no variability from one cell to another in the magnitude of the difference.

In contrast, for any degree of difference between GM , and GM, perfectly

noncorrespondent matrices have maximal variability among the cells in

the magnitude of the difference.

aS ES EB

RG,

Figure 6.4

Illustrations of matrices yielding high and low values of RC’, by the min

diff transformation.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The equations may be examined with respect to the conditions under

which a person will have RC in the transformed matrix. If RC ,is large and

the other terms are small, RC’, will, of course, be large. Also, as shown in

matrix L of Figure 6.4, RC’, will also be high if person A exercises high

FC,. In both cases the A term in the formulas is large. There is also a

difference between the grand means. For the case in which GM, = GM,g,

it can be seen that RC’, is large if the A term is small and B and C are

large and equal both in sign and magnitude. This is illustrated in Figure

6.4 by matrix M which yields no RC’, and matrix N which yields a sizable

one. The essential components of matrix N, reflecting the B and C terms,

are shown in matrix O, which shows that the simple FC and BC combination generates RC’ , despite the absence of RC , in the original matrix.

For the case in which RC, = RC,, FC, = FC,, and BC, = BC, the

components in the min diff transformed pattern are easy to determine.

Under conditions in which GM, = GM,g, the transformed RC’ and FC’

terms are zero and BC’, = BC’, = (RC, — FC,). An illustration is provided by the PDG in Figure 6.5. All such matrices, in which the outcomes

are symmetric around a diagonal, yield transformed patterns characterized wholly by correspondent MBC.

Given

Figure 6.5

Transformation of the PDG by the min diff criterion.

Nonlinear Transformations Involving the Comparison Level

The preceding transformations bear linear relations to own and/or other's

given outcomes. The functions relating the given and the effective outcomes, however, may sometimes be nonlinear; for example, in comparing his own outcomes with those of his partner the person may not

find that his resultant satisfaction increases linearly with the (own-other)

algebraic difference. Instead, he may experience a great gain in satisfaction as he moves from being just below the partner to being just above

him. In the extreme case there is a stepwise or discontinuous transformation, all outcomes below those of the partner being equally negative

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

and all outcomes above, equally positive. As shown in Figure 6.6, if this

discontinuous max rel transformation is made by both persons, a given

matrix of moderately high correspondence will be transformed into a

two-outcome-level matrix of perfect noncorrespondence. This transformation is probably encouraged by experience in win-lose reward

systems in which “winner takes all’ and second best gets nothing, no

matter how close he comes to winning.

Figure 6.6

Consequences of a discontinuous max rel transformation.

More generally, the person’s comparison level (CL) not only defines a

zero point for his outcomes—the dividing line between satisfaction and

dissatisfaction—but may also introduce a stretching out of the values in

that particular region of the scale. Indeed, psychologically, this seems to

be the implication of the distinction between satisfactory and unsatisfactory outcomes—that there is a region of discontinuity in the outcome

scale. This view of the nonlinear transforming effects of the CL is consistent with Sidney Siegel’s proposal that the level of aspiration be

defined as the upper boundary of that region of the objective utility scale

in which there is the sharpest rate of change in subjective utility (see

Siegel 1957, for references to the evidence in support of this proposal).

The nonlinear effect of the CL would be reflected in the given matrix

insofar as the CL exists before the present interaction. Thus the experimenter may set outcome goals for one or both players in a game, thereby

defining success and producing a stretching of the outcome scale between

those values below a goal and those above it. The nonlinear effect would

constitute part of the transformation process generating the effective matrix to the extent that the CL is modified in the present relationship by

information about the partner’s outcomes. Thus the partner’s generally

higher level of outcomes (his higher GM) may raise the person’s outcome

aspirations. In the extreme case illustrated in Figure 6.6 each person’s CL

is totally defined by the partner’s outcomes. As these examples show,

there is a close similarity between the processes underlying CL and the

max rel outcome transformation.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Whether the CL is externally or internally anchored, the effect of its

nonlinear transformation depends ‘on (a) the preceding pattern of interdependence and (b) the levels of CL for the two persons. This is shown in

Figure 6.7 in which the given PDG and MDG matrices have been transformed by low, medium, and high CLs. For each transformation the scale

has been stretched six points at the CL. The transformed values are

deviations from the CL with three points added for the positive and three

points subtracted for the negative. The indices of correspondence show

that the medium CL decreases noncorrespondence and the low and high

CLs increase noncorrespondence (slightly) for the PDG. In contrast, for

the MDG pattern the medium CL decreases correspondence, whereas the

low and high CLs increase it. Of course, the transformation tends to

change the type of pattern as well; for example, the transformed version

of the PDG resulting from the high CL no longer satisfies the condition of

the original pattern that the joint outcome be highest in the upper left cell.

The examples in Figure 6.7 show that the effects of a nonlinear transformation associated with a CL depends on the level of that CL in relation

to the values in the matrix and the pattern of the given matrix. These

effects occur only for values of the CL that are within the range of values

in the matrix. If the CL is outside that range, its “stretching” effect does

not modify the pattern of the matrix.

SSISSISSI

Figure 6.7

Transformations of PDG and MDG by different comparison levels.

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

TRANSPOSITIONS OF CELLS IN THE GIVEN MATRIX

This and the next section deal with certain temporal aspects of the interaction. In the present case we consider only the single interaction, defined

by the time interval during which both persons enact or become committed to enact items from their respective behavioral repertories. Various possibilities relate to the sequence of their separate actions or decisions as well as to the intercommunication of their actions or decisions. In

one extreme case they make their decisions simultaneously and independently, without communication or knowledge of each other’s decisions. In a different case, of special interest here, one person acts and

makes that action known to the partner before the latter makes a decision.

If, ona given occasion of interaction, one person acts first, the partner is

permitted to take account of that action in deciding on his own. In effect,

the first action provides the partner with a decision different from the one

he would have faced otherwise. This can be described in terms of match or

not match, match meaning that he makes the same choice as the first actor

and not match meaning that he makes the opposite choice. (By same choice

we mean the action with the same subscript as that taken by the partner.

Thusa ,is the same choice with respect tob, but the opposite with respect

to b,. Some of the examples that follow may be easier to understand if A

and B are assumed to have identical sets of behavioral options, but the

logic of the analysis does not require this.)

This set of events generates a transformed matrix that is simply the

given matrix with two cells transposed. We refer to this process as a

transpositional transformation. It is illustrated for Chicken in Figure 6.8.

Person B’s first action, by providing the ‘match versus not match” alternative to A, transforms the matrix in the manner shown.

It is this transpositional transformation that often motivates interdependent persons, depending on the given matrix, to try to act first (preempt) or to have the partner act first (wait). In Chicken B’s interest in

acting first is clear. He provides A with RC’, in favor of not matching. If

B’s first action has beenb y, this RC’ , works to B’s advantage. The various

preemption games derive their name from this fact. An example of a

matrix in which a person is motivated to wait and let the partner go first is

provided by MFC. As shown in Figure 6.8, by matching B’s first response

A can reward B for b, and withhold reward for b,. Thus the successful

“waiter” is able to convert his FC to BC.

Noncorrespondent MBC in Figure 6.9 provides another case of a person’s gaining from successful waiting. Person B’s first action provides A

with RC’, which ensures A a good outcome; B’s reluctance to transform

the matrix in this manner is predictable because he becomes unilaterally

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Beds a bate

Figure 6.8

Effect of B’s first action on Chicken and MFC.

dependent on A in a situation in which FC’; is discordant with RC’,.

Transposition has this consequence for all the patterns with dominant

noncorrespondent MBC.

Correspondent MBC (Figure 6.9) provides each person with an interest

in both preemption and waiting. Thus B’s preemption eliminates the

common coordination problem, and although it makes him unilaterally

dependent on A this may be acceptable because of the concordance

between FC’, and RC’

We shall not go into the question of exactly how a person manages

successfully to preempt or wait. The transformed matrices are presented

here merely to show the logical consequences of preemption. It is important to note that the transpositional transformation occurs only if the

partner of the person who acts first knows that the action has actually occurred.

The relation of the components in the transformed matrix to those in

the given matrix is shown in Figure 6.10. This is for the case in which B has

acted first. (By interchanging subscripts Figure 6.10 also describes the

relations when A acts first.) It is apparent that transposing cells ina given

row will have no effect on the between-row sources of variance (RC, and

FC). The other terms are interchanged. The transformation of the BC

terms into RC’, and FC’sis illustrated by the MBC matrices in Figure 6.9.

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

Given

Transformed

Match

Not match

; ES

‘ realy

Correspondent

Noncorrespondent

Pak Sw > Se

Baas

Petre

Figure 6.9

Effect of B’s first action on correspondent MBC and noncorrespondent MBC.

The transformation of FC; into BC’, is illustrated by MFC in Figure 6.8. In

the latter, it may seem strange to consider A as having BC over B (BC's)

when B has already acted. BC, however, has the same significance in this

transformed matrix as it has in any other matrix. In selecting his (first)

action, B must realize that his outcome depends on what A does

—whether he matches or not. Furthermore, if A has already made a choice

in the transformed matrix, in this case, between match and not match,

Components

Given matrix:

RC4,

RCg;

FCy4,

FCp;

BC,,

BC,

Transformed matrix:

RC4,

RCB;

FCA,

FC;

BCa,

Figure 6.10

Relation between components of given matrix and those of the matrix

resulting from B’s first action.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

then B will make his choice according to the BC pattern. We return to this

point when considering double transpositions.

The transpositional transformation has no effect on the degree of correspondence. It can be seen that any discordant relations between RC-FC

pairs are carried forward or translated into noncorrespondent MBC and

that noncorrespondent MBC is translated into a discordant relation between RC’, and FC’;. More intuitively, it will be realized that because the

pairings of outcome values do not change with transposition the degree

of correspondence can undergo no change.

Double Transpositions

If person A can commit himself to a certain choice in the transformed

match versus not match matrix before B acts, then that matrix itself is

transformed. This is shown for the PDG in Figure 6.11. The meanings of

“match” and “not match” in PDG’ have been spelled out so that we may

be clear about the meaning of B’s new alternatives in PDG”. A’s match is

equivalent to “I will doa, if you dob, anda,if you dob,.”” His not match

means

that his actions will be the opposite under these two circumstances. Following A’s preemption of match or not match, B’s choice

(assuming that he is willing to act first) now becomes one between “I will

do b, if you match and by, otherwise’ and “I will do b, if you match

and b,, otherwise.”

PDG’

PDG"

a, if b,

a, if b,

if by

a, if

match

if rate

if aw

aN eeEN

Figure 6.11

Double transposition of the PDG.

The consequences of this double preemption are apparent. In the original PDG each person’s following his RC resulted in both getting less than

they might have. PDG' (as generated by B’s simple preemption) does not

improve the situation. B would be unlikely to preempt with b, and his b,

first choice generates a matching response because of BC’, in PDG’.

Matters are different in PDG”, however. Person A can commit himself to

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

match with confidence that B’s response will be b

,, by virtue of RC"s. (For

the same reason

A will not commit himself at the outset to not match.) The

result will be the attainment of the set of outcomes that is as beneficial as

possibie to both parties.

This analysis is essentially that of Nigel Howard in his metagame

theory (1971). It should be viewed as a logical possibility in relation to any

pattern of interdependence but not as one that is necessarily to be

expected. Like all these transformations, it requires considerable understanding of logical implications and consequences. This is especially true

for the person (A in our example) who first states a matching rule. More

importantly, that person must have (a) a means of making a convincing

commitment (to match, in our example) and (b) the ability to wait until the

partner takes his action in the original matrix. Finally, because both

persons can play either role, there may be a problem of coordinating role

assignments. The analysis is thwarted if both become committed to

matching at the same time. Among these several problems the one of

commitment seems the most central. The analysis states that the two

come to the point at which B can say “I am proceeding with b , because I

understand you are then required, by your prior commitment, to match

it,” and A can only say (or think), ‘According to my commitment, which I

am now unable to overturn, if you are doing b,, I must do a,.”

AVERAGING OVER SUCCESSIVE OCCASIONS

Most relationships involve repeated interaction about the same or similar

things; that is, there are a number of separate occasions on which both

persons enact items from their respective behavioral repertories. This

makes it possible for the persons to think about the pattern of their

individual and joint actions on a series of occasions. Perhaps the most

common example is the mutual patterning of choices involved in turn

taking. ‘“You have what you want this time, and the next time | will have

what I want.” As this example suggests, sequential rules for choice often

evolve in noncorrespondent relations to provide a mutually acceptable

equalization of the two persons’ outcomes. Other rules serve the interests

of the individual, as in protecting him from exploitation by his partner. In

either case the effect of these rules, which we refer to as sequential transformations, is to transform the given matrix. (It will undoubtedly be clear

to the reader that we are dealing here with a temporal pattern of events

over successive instances of mutual action. This is to be contrasted with the

preceding section in which we considered the implications of the temporal sequence of events during a single instance of mutual action.)

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The Consequences of Sequential Transformations

Following a systematic sequence of choices in a given matrix is a means of

limiting the outcomes to certain portions of the matrix or, in some cases,

of spreading the outcomes systematically over the entire matrix. This is

most readily illustrated when A always chooses a, and B alternates between U, and b,. Obviously the result will be an alternation of outcomes

between those in the a,b, cell and those in the a,b, cell. Some of the many

possibilities are shown in Figure 6.12 in which we present six simple rules

(e.g., for B): (a) repeatedly play b,, (b) repeatedly play b», (c) play b,; and

then alternate (i.e., alternate between b, and b,, beginning with b,), (d)

play b,and then alternate, (e) randomly choose

b, orb, each time (in ratio of

50:50), and (f) ‘’tit-for-tat,’’ which means “play what the partner played

last time.” Figure 6.12 shows the consequences of the two persons’

adopting various pairs of these rules. The part of each small matrix drawn

in heavy outline is sampled by the given pair of sequential rules. The

outcomes gained by each member of the pair would yield an average

equal to his average outcome in the indicated portion of the matrix. (The

consequences of tit-for-tat are only approximately as shown because the

person will have to make a first choice before being able to match what his

partner did before and the partner will have a final “unanswered” choice.

The consequences of mutual tit-for-tat are equivocal, depending on the

initial choices the pair happens to make.) Although some of the rule

combinations in Figure 6.12 focus on one cell, of greater interest here are

those that average over two cells or all four cells. (More complex rules may

average over three of the four cells, e.g., b,b,bob\b,b.

. paired with

Aafia pany.

The specific consequences of any of these combinations of rules will

depend, of course, on the distribution of outcomes in the given matrix. A

convenient way to represent the possibilities is by a plot of the four pairs

of A’s and B’s outcomes in the given matrix. This is shown in Figure 6.13

for the PDG, the threat game, and symmetric and asymmetric games

from Figure 4.4. Each pair of outcomes in the given matrix is plotted as an

x. It is a fact that the average of any combination of cells in a given matrix

falls within the convex polygon formed by connecting its four pairs of

values (the four x’s). This is shown for each of the four patterns by the

crosshatched area. Thus any set of sequential rules must yield, as an

average outcome, some point within that area. The consequences of

seven of the pairs of rules, corresponding to the numbered pairs in Figure

6.12, are plotted in the areas of Figure 6.13. The particular rules we have

chosen yield outcomes located midway between pairs of outcomes in the

given matrix and at the center of gravity of the crosshatched area. Other

‘sayni [erjuanbas jo suotjeurquios snore Aq payduies x1yeur uaa8 ayy yosuoniog

Z1°9 amn31q

asay} JO auO

yeI—10j—-311 (f)

wopuey |

np. ts 3

amuae |

ajni s,Y UOs1ag

%q/‘q wopuey (a)

ajeusayyje ‘°q (p)

ajeusayje ‘'g (2)

&q yeaday (4)

'g yeaday (2)

aynd

$,q UOSIAdg

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Threat game

Figure 6.13

Consequences of different combinations of sequential rules for four

different patterns.

rules, representing various weightings of the combinations of cells,

would yield outcome pairs in other parts of the area; for example, rules

producinga,b,anday,b, ina

ratio of 2:1 would yield the outcomes indicated

by asterisks. (This results in equal outcomes for A and B in the asymmetric

game.)

These examples serve to make two points: (a) Sequential transformations can yield new sets of outcomes on the frontier of the relationship. (Cf. the discussion of frontier in Chapter 5.) Thus, in effect, they

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

make it possible to increase the degree of correspondence in the relationship. The particular sequence required to accomplish this depends, of

course, on the given pattern; for example, pair 3 (or any pair sampling the

upper row) yields new frontier points for PDG and the threat game, pair 6

(or any pair sampling the a,b, and a,b, cells) does so for the symmetric

game, and pair 3 (or any pair sampling the upper row) does so for the

asymmetric game. More generally, the consequence of most pairs of

sequential rules depends greatly on the given matrix, as shown in Figure

6.13. (b) Sequential transformations do not add pairs of outcomes outside

the limits of the set defined by the given pairs. The domain of pairs,

indicated by the crosshatched polygon, is not changed in shape. It is

changed by various outcome transformations, which fact, as discussed in

Chapter 7, creates the basis for the joint use of sequential rules and

outcome transformations. At present it is important to note that the

various pairs of rules differ in the degree to which they satisfy various

value criteria. Pair3 satisfies both the criteria of max joint and min diff

in the

threat game, and pair 6 has the same effect on the symmetric game. The

special pair indicated by the asterisk satisfies min diff but not max joint for

the asymmetric game. (See discussion in Chapter 4 of irreconcilability

between MJP and equality of outcomes iti such patterns.)

The Choice Among Sequential Transformations

When a person adopts a particular sequential policy, he is, in effect,

acting within an interdependence matrix in which the alternatives are

different policies. An example is the 6 x 6 matrix that can be derived for

any game by entering

A’s and B’s respective average outcomes in the 36

cells of Figure 6.12. A transformed matrix of this sort obviously has some

relation to the given matrix on which it is based, its components depending in a systematic way on the components of the given matrix. We shall

not attempt to determine the relations between these two sets of components but instead merely point out some of the major consequences of

adopting certain policies.

The pattern of sampling the cells of the given matrix, described in Figure

6.12, reveals that in most cases the consequences of B’s following a given

sequential rule depend to a great extent on the rule A adopts. Those that

are least affected by what the partner does, ‘repeat b;’ or “repeat b,,””

simply sample one row or the other. These clearly do not benefit B unless

he already has a considerable degree of RC in the given matrix.

Tit-for-tat has the interesting property that it samples cells located

symmetrically with respect to the major axis (upper left to lower right) of

the given matrix, regardless of the rule the partner follows. This has the

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

important consequence that in symmetrical games the difference between own and other’s average score is minimized. Thus a person solely

concerned about the min diff criterion and interacting in a symmetrical

pattern can fulfill this criterion merely by the tit-for-tat sequential rule.

(This is not exactly true, for the reason, mentioned earlier, that in any

finite interaction sequence the person must make an initial choice without

following the rule—before his partner has established a “prior choice,”

and then on any last play the partner makes a choice to which the

tit-for-tat sequence has no opportunity to reply.)

It seems clear that for most given matrices the consequences of a given

alternation rule depend a great deal on what rule the partner adopts.

Against a similar alternation rule it samples the major diagonal of the

matrix. Against the opposite alternation rule or against tit-for-tat it

samples the minor diagonal. (Against a tit-for-tat with a one-step

lag—“do what the partner did time before last’’—the alternation rule

would also sample the major diagonal.)

Random choice of the two responses (in a 50:50 ratio) produces a

sampling of the entire matrix against all the other variable sequential rules

(i.e., except against repeat a, or repeat a,). Under these circumstances it

yields the person his grand average GM, and the average difference

between his and his partner’s score is (GM,— GM.,). Just why a person

might wish to sample the whole matrix requires some explaining. Superficially, this policy seems contrary to the central theme of the interdependence analysis, which is that the person takes account of the

controls involved and attempts through selective action to use them to his

own benefit. However, in games of very high conflict of interest (the

constant-sum game is the best example) there are certain instances in

which the best way a person can protect his own interests is by random

response. Three constant-sum games (zero-sum games) are illustrated in

Figure 6.14. In all such games, because of the strict conflict of interest,

there is no basis for agreement between the two persons. Each must

assume that the other, in the pursuit of his own interest, will consistently

work against one’s own interest. In Case I, characterized mainly by BRC,

each will follow his RC, and the interaction, however often repeated, will

result ina,b,;—A making one point and B losing one. (We might doubt that

B would stay in the game unless for reasons not specified in the matrix he

is required to.) Case II, characterized largely by RC and BC, also has a

consistent outcome but for a slightly different reason. B’s RC leads him

to enact b, and, anticipating this, the BC impinging on A leads him to

enact a.

Case III, characterized primarily by MBC, poses an entirely different

problem. The preferred action of each depends on what the other does.

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

{NIX

Figure 6.14

Three constant-sum games that require different means for protecting the

individual's interests.

Accordingly, of course, each would prefer to wait to see what the other

will do before deciding. Precluding this possibility (assuming that the

movement of events requires both to act and prevents either from “‘waiting’),

a random sequential rule has an advantage. Turning over the

decision to the toss of a coin prevents one’s partner from anticipating

one’s choice in any way. This is true for each single trial, but also over a

series of trials it prevents his detecting any explicit or implicit patterning

in one’s successive choices. Furthermore,

a particular random rule

(referred to as amixed or randomized strategy, and not necessarily selecting

the two choices in a 50:50 ratio) has the special consequence that no

matter what sequential rule the partner follows it yields one the same

average value. In other words, if we imagine placing this particular rule in

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the matrix derived from Figure 6.12, its outcome is the same regardless of the

partner's sequential rule.

A mixed strategy with this property is calculated, for example, for

person A in the third matrix of Figure 6.14, by determining an allocation of

choices between a, and a, such that A’s average outcome will be the same

when B chooses b, as when he chooses by. The proportion p of the time for

A (randomly) to select a, is determined by solving the following equation

which is simply a mathematical translation of the preceding sentence:

PY) +30 =p). Ce) ape

ee)

The numbers in the equation are A’s outcomes in the matrix. The value of

p is 5/7; therefore a, is chosen on five-sevenths of the occasions and 4@y, on

two-sevenths. A random sequence with these proportions will yield A an

average outcome of +1/7 no matter what B does.

A similar argument and calculation could be made for person B. His

best mixed strategy is to choose b, four-sevenths of the time and b,,

three-sevenths. This rule will yield him an average outcome of —1/7. It is

the minimax theorem of game theory (Luce and Raiffa, 1957) that these

two sequential rules are in equilibrium—that they represent the best each

person can do in the face of the other’s conflicting efforts. B minimizes the

maximum loss A can impose on him and A maximizes the minimum gain

B can restrict him to. It may be appropriate to remind the reader that the

randomized sequential strategy, calculated as described above, is appropriate only for patterns in which the dominant component is MBC, as in

Case III in Figure 6.14. The interested reader is referred to Appendix 3 of

Luce and Raiffa (1957) for a summary of the three cases and other related

ones.

The Modifiability of Sequential Transformations.

It is difficult to believe that

a person would adopt a sequential rule for some purpose, for example, to

sample the minor diagonal in the symmetric game in Figure 6.13 and then

stick with it even though he found that his partner’s sequential rule was

yielding a sampling of the major diagonal. Ordinarily such policies are

highly modifiable in the light of their early consequences. Clearly, the

sequential rule has no intrinsic property that requires its persistent pursuit, once adopted, regardless of the results. (In this respect the alternatives in the 6 X 6 matrix probably differ from ordinary behavioral

alternatives. The latter ordinarily acquire some irreversibility or commitment during their enactment.) In view of this modifiability of sequential rules it is reasonable to assume that they are adjusted in successive

interactions and that these adjustments are made on the basis of the

rule(s) the partner seems to be following. Similarly, once a person has

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

learned what the various consequences are and can assume that his

partner has similar sophistication, these adjustments can be made in

advance by a “vicarious trial and error” process. In this, the person

reasons somewhat as follows: “If I follow rule 1, my partner will find it

advantageous to follow rule 6. In that case I'll find it desirable to shift to 3

and he'll shift to 4 and that will be O.K. with me. So I might as well start

out with 3 and he'll either start with 4 or shift to it when he sees what I’m

doing.” Indeed, because of their modifiability, the adoption of sequential

rules is essentially a matter of agreement between the two persons. This is

obvious for rules that serve their common interest such as alternation

which permits turn taking. However, it is even true, although ina slightly

different sense, for the rules that protect each person’s interests in a

constant-sum game. The adoption of simple or mixed strategies that are

in equilibrium at least indicates that the two persons see the relationship

in the same way. It also suggests a kind of convergent conversation of the

type above.

Sequential Transformations in the Service of Outcome

Transformations

We noted earlier that sequential transformations do not change the shape

of the plot of points (Figure 6.13), but they do make it possible for the

distortions produced by outcome transformations to yield different effective matrices than they would otherwise. This results from the fact that

sequential rules yield new points within the domain of the given plot that

better satisfy various criteria, such as min diff or max joint. Therefore it

seems reasonable to assume that sequential transformations are often

used with various outcome transformations. This is described in Chapter

THE CONSEQUENCES OF REPEATED PLAY

In most experimental research on interdependence matrices the subjects

are required to make choices among their alternatives simultaneously and

independently (without communication) and to do this repeatedly for a

number of trials. Does this procedure affect the nature of the interdependence between the two persons? The answer has already been

implied in the foregoing discussions, but because of the widespread use

of this procedure it must be made explicit and given some emphasis. This

is necessary to counteract the unfortunate tendency for investigators to

analyze a game theoretically in terms of ‘‘one-shot play’’ and then to be

surprised when repeated play does not conform empirically to their

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

analysis. Our point is, of course, that the procedure of repeated play

transforms the pattern of interdependence. As a result the choices facing

a person in simple, single-trial play in a given matrix may be quite different from those he faces in the transformed matrix generated by

repeated play.

The course of interaction over repeated trials can be exceedingly complex. Even for a simple interdependence pattern (e.g., MFC), what the

two persons manage to communicate, how they succeed in influencing

each other, and how their motivations and intentions wax and wane can

be very different from one pair to another. Therefore it is impossible to

analyze in simple terms the exact transformational effects of repeated

play. We can, however, illustrate some of the possible components of this

transformational process and explain some of the ways in which the

interdependence may be modified.

One aspect of repeated play is that it makes possible a detection of the

outcome transformation the partner is making and a corresponding

adjustment in one’s own transformation. As shown in Chapter 7, the

outcome transformation that a person should make (in terms of achieving

high given outcomes) is contingent in part on the transformation the

partner adopts. With one-shot play one can only make assumptions

about the partner and act accordingly. With repeated play, one is faced

with what is effectively a coordination problem of adapting one’s choice

criterion to the one the partner seems to be following.

Perhaps the most obvious aspect of repeated play is that it affords a

person the opportunity to decide in advance on a specific policy for his

successive choices. The effective interdependence matrix for him at that

point is the one constituted by the various rules available to him, those

available to his partner, and the consequences of various pairs of rules.

Figure 6.12 is illustrative of this effective matrix. As we have noted, the

outcome pattern in this ‘rule matrix’’ depends on the given matrix in

which the repeated play occurs. When the given matrix is characterized by

considerable interdependence (i.e., when the BRC component is relatively small), the matrix of sequential rules is characterized by considerable MBC. Thus in Figure 6.12 the consequences of the nonrepetitive

rules depend to a great degree on the rule the partner adopts. (The

repetitive rules are appropriate only when one or both persons have

dominant RC. An exception among the nonrepetitive rules is randomization, but this is a defensive way to avoid the implications of the

interdependence that is appropriate only for a subset of the constant-sum

matrices.) In brief—and this general idea will be intuitively clear to the

player—the sequence one must follow for good outcomes depends on the

sequence one’s partner follows. This is true even for MFC in which your

LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

outcomes are totally under your partner’s control. With repeated play

your problem is not simply whether to use your FC to the partner’s

benefit or detriment (as it is in one-shot play) but rather it is how to use

your FC to induce your partner to use his FC to your benefit. For this

conversion of FC to BC, it is necessary to make sure that the partner

experiences only (or mainly) outcomes from the main diagonal of the

MFC matrix (see Figure 6.8), that is, that he be rewarded only when he

rewards you and not otherwise. How to do this obviously depends on

what he does; for example, for the limited set of rules specified in Figure

6.12 only certain combinations yield the main diagonal. The point is that

even though the given matrix is an MFC pattern the person’s problem is

one of coordinating with the partner in a sequential pattern of choices.

Effectively, the person is in an MBC situation.

Another aspect of repeated play (and one related to the sequential

effects above) is that it makes possible something akin to a transpositional

transformation of the given matrix. In the course of repeated play a

person often has some opportunity to indicate his intention to match or

not match his partner’s choice. If he succeeds in doing so, a double

transposition of the given matrix is made possible. Using MFC as one

example, we can see in Figure 6.15 that, when person A makes a ,commitment to match, B has RC in the effective matrix. B ensures himself a

reward by helping A because A automatically returns the favor. In repeated play, ifA can manage to make his choice each time after first seeing

B’s, he will find it fairly easy to communicate his commitment. The same

is true for repeated play in which the two persons alternate in making

their separate choices (as is easily done with decomposed versions of the

PDG). Person A shows his intention to match B simply by always choosing the action previously chosen by B. Problems develop only ifB is trying

to communicate a similar intention, in which case they may become

locked-in on an exchange of nonrewarding choicés. In repeated play

involving simultaneous and independent choices (a common experimental

procedure) the matching commitment is more difficult to convey because

MFC’

MFC”

match

Not match

b, if

Seen xs

“ANS

6.15 aE

transposition of MFC.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

on trial N person A can only match B’s choice on trial N — 1. Thus paired

with B’s current response is an action that matches his prior response, a

fact that he is likely to overlook. Thus the communication of commitment

that is necessary to accomplish the double transposition involves a good

deal of noise and ambiguity.

In general, these illustrations suggest that repeated play tends to transform the given matrix. The transformation is not simple in form and many

ambiguities are involved. A person will have difficulty in determining the

policy his partner is following and in communicating his own policy. A

major source of confusion will be in sorting out the portion of his partner’s

behavior that reflects his policy and the portion that reflects his reactions

to one’s own actions. We might expect more efficient achievement of

understanding if one person is more strongly guided by a policy intention

and the other is more reactive and open to influence. Some of the communication and attribution problems alluded to here are considered in

Chapter 8.

The effect of repeated play on game behavior has been impressively

documented by Shure and Meeker (1968). Subjects playing repeated

trials of the PDG yielded about 50% competitive choices, which is close to

the typical rate of such behavior in experiments using this procedure. In

contrast, subjects playing under the same conditions but believing they

were paired up with a new partner on each trial (the series thus constituting a succession of one-shot games) yielded a competitive choice

rate of more than 80%. As the authors note, the latter is more in conformity with the one-play logic of the game which is to take the dominant

(RC-favored) choice. At the other extreme are results presented by

Deutsch (1958) for a procedure involving reversibility of choices. The PD

game used was one that yielded a competitive choice rate of about 65%

under standard simultaneous choice conditions. The reversibility procedure permitted each person to make tentative choices which could then

be changed until both persons, knowing both choices, were satisfied.

Under standard “individualistic” motivational conditions this procedure

yielded a competitive choice rate of only 23%. We may suggest that the

reversibility procedure permitted a player to communicate his intention

to match the partner which then produced the effective matrix of the

doubly transposed PDG (Figure 6.11).

Origin and

Evocation of

Transformations

Functions of Transformations, 169

The Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations,

The Learning of Prosocial Transformations, 174

Domain of Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations, 175

The Functional Value of Egoistic Transformations, 176

The Tension Between Prosocial and Egoistic Transformations, 178

The Functional Approach, 178

Evidence of Transformations, 181

Evocation of Transformations, 184

Information About Other’s Outcomes, 184

Salience of Destructive Aspects of Conflict, 187

Future of the Relationship, 189

Evaluation Apprehension, 190

The Partner’s Apparent Transformation, 193

Transformations Made by Social Models, 193

Type and Amount of Incentive, 196

Decomposition, 199

Dispositional Sources of Transformations, 200

The General Theory of Transformations:

The Self-Regulation of Motivation, 202

tieale

Sar APN

Pr,

wt hee frie gM he jut

ir a)

weet O78

o gach

cr 3 +

, ang ton

NOUSIONEE

Pad)

? ieitheiiee

anoiisrinotentan ot

i.e

a |

_otesanerteieas yo bias

risks

Tie ek.

1T ln s' Lita.

yy Pi bert \ epee 5

til) ee Apes ay | pest y ns

Saiily '

lent

HY 64 eae oak imap E ‘te neha eto

Ca here

ble lyon ray ee

Lseg

vai ito tien Aaa de

Sty!

iceade)

tety ve iyrerckag a

x) mi rik

hi 'Dverws cat ie na

Spey! y mA

a si

f th

a Ma pone

Piney

wealth ateolt Wed yt yhald

) einen My

‘Vitis

nod pore

ABSTRACT

This chapter considers the factors that are broadly responsible for the occurrence of

transformations. At the outset an analysis is made of the functional value of the

transformations described in Chapter 6 as applied to the salient patterns of

interdependence identified in Chapter 4. This analysis identifies the functional

bases for learning to make, under certain conditions, particular transformations

for particular patterns of the given matrix. A subsequent section briefly considers

the conceptual problems associated with interpreting behavior as providing evidence of transformations. We then discuss the evidence bearing on situational

factors that evoke or elicit various types of transformation. A brief review is made

of evidence pertaining to the existence of individual differences in transformational

tendencies. A final section points to the general theory of self-regulation of

motivation that 1s implied by the present special theory of transformations in

contexts of social interdependence.

In Chapter 6 we have analyzed the ways in which certain simple transformations modify the given matrix and create different interdependence

problems for the dyad. We described a range of possible effects of transformations—possibilities that depend on the transformation or combination of transformations that each person makes and on their given

relationship. In the present chapter we move from possibilities to

actualities. We first continue the theoretical analysis by examining the

potential benefits the two persons may gain from making certain transformations. This analysis of the functions served by transformations

provides the basis for speculations about how interdependent persons

learn to make them.

FUNCTIONS OF TRANSFORMATIONS

Why would interdependent people not behave according to the outcomes

in the given matrix but instead transform it in some manner by treating it

as if it were some other matrix? In our approach to this question we

consider the functional values various transformations have for the indiINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

vidual. The benefits a person can derive from making a given transformation provide a basis for that transformation to be learned as a value,

enacted under appropriate conditions, and maintained without sermons

or examples. Also, of course, the experience of these benefits may

heighten the person’s imitativeness of others who manifest similar transformations and may lend credibility to moral lectures.

The strategy of our analysis is to examine a diverse sample of patterns

of interdependence and to consider the advantages there might be for a

person or pair of persons to adopt a given transformation. On the

assumption that our sample of patterns adequately represents the learning situations in which, in general (across different cultures, social strata,

and family and personal circumstances), such values might be acquired,

the results of the analysis suggest the transformations that generally exist

in human social life. In a later section, we raise the possibility of identifying different patterns of experience in interdependent relationships that

generate individual differences in favored transformations.

It is possible to distinguish two major functions that transformations

may serve for the individual. First, they may provide a basis for action where

none exists in the given matrix. The transformed matrix may have RC’ or

BC’ along with the partner’s RC’ where the given matrix has neither

(neither RC nor BC with partner’s RC). (As in Chapter 6, RC’ refers to

reflexive control in the transformed matrix and RC, to reflexive control in

the given matrix.) Second, they may enable the person more certainly to

attain better given outcomes than he would otherwise. By following his RC’

or BC’ the person may obtain better outcomes in the given matrix than he

would have if he had acted merely according to the RC or BC terms in the

given matrix.

An example provided by MFC is shown in Figure 7.1. If each person

makes a max joint transformation, he has RC’ (favoring his first behavior)

where in the orginal matrix he had none. If both persons act according to

Given

Effective

Figure 7.1.

MFC and its max joint transformation.

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

their RC’ values, each is assured of getting his best given outcome (+1),

whereas in the absence of transformation his outcome is uncertain and

may be 0.

In the manner illustrated by this example we examined the consequences of a variety of transformations, specifically max joint, max other,

max rel, min diff, min other, transpositions in which self or other goes first,

and sequential transformations. This was done for the 22 matrices identified in Chapter 4 as salient, representing diverse regions and landmarks

within the domain of 2 x 2 matrices. (The reader is referred to p. 109 fora

list of these matrices and for references to the figures in which they

appear.) We focused this analysis on matrices in which RC is absent

and/or in which mutual following of RC results in poor given outcomes

for one or both persons. In each case we determined what the consequences were for the individual who made a particular transformation

when his partner made the same transformation or a different one (or

none).

The Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations

The analysis reveals first that it is mutually desirable for the pair of persons

to make certain transformations under certain conditions of interdependence. With mutual fate control, as shown above, and with fate

control and behavior control (one person subject to FC, the other to BC), if

both persons make the max joint or max other transformation, each has RC’

or BC’ coupled with partner’s RC’. If followed by both, this yields them

their best given outcomes. In Chicken these same two transformations

provide RC’ when none is present in the given matrix, and in PDG they

shift the reflexive control from the D to the C action. If the resulting RC’

values are followed, in the case of PDG both persons receive more than

they would have by following RC and in the case of Chicken, they avoid

the lowest outcomes in the matrix and receive the next to the highest.

Because these transformations do not yield the best outcomes in these

latter cases, perceiving their benefits might be somewhat more difficult

than in the preceding cases. Thus for PDG a person might require some

experience with the low outcomes generated by mutual adherence to RC

before he could fully appreciate the gains to be had in, say, a max joint

transformation.

With regard to the transpositional transformations, the correspondent

mutual behavior control pattern makes it mutually desirable that someone

(either A or B) act first and the FC-BC pattern makes it mutually desirable

that a particular one (the one exercising the BC) do the same. In both cases

the effect of the proper first action is to provide the second person with

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

RC’ which, if followed, will be to their mutual benefit. It is true for both

patterns that in the absence of transposition each person’s outcomes are

uncertain. Thus there is a basis in these patterns for persons to learn that

if they have BC over their partner it is beneficial to take the initiative in

the interaction.

Of course,

counterinstances

are provided by noncorrespondent mutual behavior control, and the rule should be learned as

being adaptive only in the case of correspondence.

A transformation involving coordinated sequencing is found to be

functional for the turn-taking game shown in the upper part of Figure 7.2.

Without some transformation A and B both get nothing at a,b, by following their RC values. A sequential transformation in which they shift

between a,b, and a,b, permits them to divide up 12 units in various

proportions, depending on the ratio of a,b, to a,b, occurrences. When

max joint and min diff transformations are also introduced, the pair of

persons has a basis for agreeing to coordinate on4a,b, and a,b, insome way

(to max joint) and, specifically, to coordinate with a strict alternation or

turn-taking pattern (to min diff). Once the sequential transformation is

made the problem is implicitly a bargaining one, and the further max joint

plus min diff transformation provides the equivalent of a “prominent”

solution (in Schelling’s sense, 1960) to that problem.

This transformation ‘‘package,” of sequential shifting guided by max

joint and min diff, is mutually beneficial for a number of patterns similar to

the turn-taking game, including Battle of the Sexes and Hero (also shown

in Figure 7.2). The common component in these cases is correspondent

MBC but the turn-taking configuration stems from the discordant MFC

and/or BRC components.

Another setting in which the min diff transformation has functional

value, though in a different way, is the threat game. This situation has

been described by Thibaut and Faucheux (1965) as requiring an agreement between the allocator and the threatener in which the former agrees

to be just if the latter is loyal. This, of course, amounts to the one making a

min diff transformation and the other, a max joint transformation. As in the

turn-taking game, fulfilling the min diff criterion requires a sequential

shifting, though with the difference that only the allocator must shift, and

there is no need for coordination to attain the sequential transformation.

The basic similarity between the turn-taking and the threat games is

shown by the transposition of the latter in Figure 7.3. By insisting that the

allocator (A) always makes his choice first before he himself decides what

to do, the threatener (B) can transpose the threat game into the turntaking game. It is to B’s advantage to make the transposition because it

then creates the configuration in which there are mutual benefits to be

derived from the sequential and max joint plus min diff transformations.

The turn—taking game

(MBC + MFC + BRC) ss

Hero

(MBC + BRC)

Figure 7.2

Some patterns in which a sequential transformation and max joint plus min

diff are mutually desirable.

(i)

-Not

Given matrix

Effective matrix

Figure 7.3

By transposition the threat game becomes the turn-taking game.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The preceding analysis has focused on the positive benefits to be

gained from making certain transformations of the given matrix. By implication this analysis reveals the function of transformations in avoiding

costly conflict and the aggressive retaliatory sequences that follow from

unfair exchanges.

A more complex analysis would deal with the

cost-avoidance functions more directly but would require more differentiated matrices, both in behavior alternatives and outcome levels,

and more consistent distinctions between the rewards and costs of

interaction.

An analysis

of this

sort

would

highlight

anxiety-avoidance motives that often are involved in learning to make prosocial transformations.

It may be important to note here that in our analysis the max other

criterion is never found to have greater functional value than the max joint

criterion. In other words, these patterns of social interdependence do

not suggest that there is any unique basis for learning pure altruism as

contrasted with a “general welfare’ outlook in which the ‘general welfare’ includes one’s own interests.

The Learning of Prosocial Transformations

From the preceding illustrations we see that for’ some patterns of interdependence there is mutual benefit from max joint and max other transformations, for other patterns there is mutual benefit from transpositional

transformations, and for still other patterns, from a sequential max

joint~min diff package of transformations. In each case the mutual interest

provides a basis for possible discussion and agreement about making the

particular transformations and subsequently for experiencing their

benefits. These situations seem ideally suited to concept and value learning, for the discussion is likely to make explicit the conceptual aspects of

the transformations and, by raising the specter of the poor consequences

of action in the untransformed matrix, to instill a positive evaluation of

the transformations.

The foregoing scenario suggests that the learning of mutually desirable

transformations occurs in explicit discussion. This would, of course,

include the tutelage of a naive or imperceptive interactor by one more

sophisticated or sensible. The question naturally arises whether a person

who has insight into the mutual desirability of transformations can

induce a partner to make them without explicit communication, wholly

by actions within the relationship. It must be noted first that, ina number

of matrices with a mutual interest in prosocial transformations, if one

person acts according to such a transformation, the other is better off by

acting according to his own given outcomes than by adopting a similar

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

transformation. This important phenomenon is discussed when we consider the functionality of egoistic transformations. The problem is epitomized by the PDG in which the person who acts according to a max joint or

max other criterion is exploited by the person who acts according to max

own (no transformation) or max rel. It is also apparent that making the first

move necessary for a sequential transformation need not clearly convey

to the partner the desirability of entering into a turn-taking sequence. The

outcomes he gains from having a first turn may encourage him to expect

more without having to reciprocate. (One wonders here about the

unlearning that may sometimes be necessary in relation to the belief that

other persons will max other while oneself can continue to max own, a

belief based on the child’s early experiences with benevolent parents.)

The conclusion to be drawn from these considerations seems to be that

prosocial transformations can probably not be taught (or, at least, not

effectively) by pure interaction without the benefit of explicit communication. This seems true for max joint and max other in certain mixed

motive games and for the sequential transformation in other mixedmotive (turn-taking) games. The single exception seems to be the “going

first’ transposition in the highly correspondent MBC and FC-BC patterns. Here there is a common interest in the proper exercise of initiative

and no possibility of exploiting its occurrence.

That certain prosocial transformations cannot be taught effectively by

interaction without communication does not, of course, preclude the

possibility that such transformations can be learned by observation and

modeling (Bandura, 1969). The example of dyads who obtain good given

outcomes by taking into account their effect on each other may provide

the observer with much the same basis for valuing such “taking into

account’”” as does his own experience in dyads. Furthermore, once

learned, a transformation may be evoked by the example of the partner’s

behavior. The person well inculcated with the norm of reciprocity will

find the partner’s beneficent first move to be a clear signal to initiate

sequential turn taking.

Domain of Functional Value of Prosocial Transformations

As we have seen, the max joint and max other transformations are useful

for games with prominent MFC components (MFC, PDG, Chicken); that

is, for the “exchange” games. The sequential max joint-min diff package of

transformations is useful for games with a prominent MBC component

and discordant additional components (turn-taking, Battle of the Sexes,

and Hero), which may be described as the ‘’bargaining” games. Transpositions are functional for simple coordination games, best exemplified

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

by correspondent MBC. What has been implicit should now be made

explicit, that the highly noncorrespondent patterns and the other correspondent ones (based on BRC + MFC) involve no mutual interest in

prosocial transformations. In the perfectly correspondent combination of

BRC and MFC and in the disjunctive and conjunctive cooperative games,

without the conflict of interest and without a need for coordination (both

persons have RC), there is nothing to be gained from transformations.

The same is true of the maximizing difference game and Martyr. In the

high conflict

of interest

patterns (noncorrespondent MBC,

noncorrespondent BRC + MFC) and the several patterns of unilateral

dependence there is no mutual interest in making any of these transformations and therefore, no basis for a negotiation of transformations.

The settings, then, in which prosocial transformations may be learned are

primarily the relationships characterized by interdependence and intermediate degrees of correspondence—the mixed motive relationships in

which individual interests neither fully coincide nor are in complete

conflict with each other. These patterns of interdependence are probably

common in human social life.

The Functional Value of Egoistic Transformations

Under certain conditions a person finds it beneficial to make no transformation or an egoistic one. Depending on the pattern and the criterion

the partner is following, the person may find that his own given outcomes

are higher if he follows a max own criterion (no transformation) than if he

adopts a prosocial criterion, and he may find similar profit in a max rel

transformation or a preemptive transposition.

In Chicken and the Battle of the Sexes, if person B is simply maximizing

his own outcome and A makes a max rel transformation which he makes

known to B, A will get a better given outcome than otherwise. The shift in

relationship is shown in Figure 7.4 for Chicken. The max rel transformation gives A a clear basis for action (RC’), and knowing that, B will

presumably follow his BC’. These same two patterns also permit one

person to get his best given value, if circumstances permitting, he is able to

make a preemptive transposition. Thus these patterns in which correspondent MBC is combined with discordant MFC may provide experience that will encourage the display of a tough and competitive stance in

which outdoing the other is valued and there is a commitment to the

means of doing so. In Chapter 10 we discuss a related fact—that the

person may benefit from conveying a firm intention to follow the max rel

criterion on a contingent basis, that is, unless the partner meets certain

conditions. This occurs in connection with the use of threat in bargaining.

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

By and large, the most effective threat action is one that gives the

threatener the greatest advantage over the other person. In his experience

in identifying such actions and communicating a contingent commitment

to them the person may learn the wisdom of scanning bargaining problems in terms of the max rel criterion.

Chicken

Figure 7.4

Change in pattern whenA alone adopts a max rel transformation in Chicken.

Chicken and PDG have the property that if B makes a max joint or max

other transformation and A merely follows max own he gets his best given

outcome. (Battle of the Sexes has the same consequence if B makes a max

other transformation. The same is true for the threatener in the threat

game and for either person in the turn-taking game. In neither of the last

two, however, is there any reason for the partner to make a max other

transformation.) What is particularly significant in Chicken and PDG is

that these patterns create (a) a mutual desirability for a prosocial max joint

or max other transformation and (b) a unilateral advantage for the person

whose partner makes such a transformation but who himself continues to

use the egoistic max own criterion. There is, in these patterns, the opportunity to learn to discriminate what value transformation the partner is

making and to act accordingly. If he is acting egoistically, there is mutual

benefit in encouraging a bilateral max joint transformation, but if he is

already acting according to the prosocial criterion there is personal benefit

in focusing exclusively on own outcomes.

The other side of the coin is that the person who makes the prosocial

transformation in the face of the partner’s egoistic action suffers low

outcomes in the given matrix. They are low in the absolute range of

outcomes and, of course, low in relation to what might be attained by

interaction with another person who also makes a prosocial transformation. Rather similar are the examples mentioned earlier (Chicken

and Battle of the Sexes) in which a person benefits from max rel when the

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

partner simply persists in max own. The latter receives a smaller outcome

than he might find reasonable to expect from the relationship.

The Tension Between Prosocial and Egoistic Transformations

The foregoing analysis shows that interdependence relationships provide settings in which, by virtue of the rewards they yield the individual,

both prosocial and egoistic transformations may be learned. In two

respects the learning must involve discrimination: (a) learning to make a

transformation appropriate to the given interdependence pattern and (b)

learning to make a transformation appropriate to the partner’s current or

potential transformation. The latter is of particular importance because,

as we have seen, in certain situations there are losses to be sustained by

being more prosocial (or less competitive) in one’s transformations than is

one’s partner. At the same time potential gains may go unrealized by

failure to perceive the partner’s readiness for a joint move to prosocial

transformations. The counterposed aspects of the situation are complex.

Both persons may gain by such a joint move, but one may gain even more

if he can meet the partner’s prosocial transformation with an egoistic one.

However, that may be only a short-run advantage if its effect is to

discourage the partner from continuing the transformation, in which case

the possibilities of mutual gain in a joint prosocial orientation may be

delayed or even made impossible. Aware of these opposing considerations, the socially sophisticated individual will experience a tension

between prosocial and egoistic transformations. As we describe in Chapter 8, in his attempt to resolve this tension wisely, he will be deeply

concerned with the attributional problems of inferring the partner’s

actual and potential transformations and the presentational problems of

creating a proper image of his own actual and potential transformations.

The Functional Approach

The preceding analysis provides a scenario both for the collective experience of interdependent people and for the individual experience of each

person. In the course of social history mankind will have developed

beliefs about the value of various behavioral rules and choice criteria,

beliefs that reflect the benefits of these rules and criteria in reducing,

under certain conditions, intrapersonal uncertainty and interpersonal

conflict. These beliefs will be reflected in the moral and practical teachings

of each human group and society. In the course of his own life history, as

he moves through a variety of interpersonal relationships, the individual

will experience the same benefits of these rules and criteria. Because of

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

their availability in the common beliefs, he need not discover them anew.

If well formulated and communicated, the rules reflected in the shared

beliefs will afford him convenient guides for working out conflictavoidant and outcome-optimizing agreements with his counterparts.

Thus, being considerate of other persons’ needs and helping them attain

their goals will often be found necessary in order to obtain the cooperation from them that the individual desires. Furthermore, the elders

and authorities in his group will urge the beliefs on him, reward his

adherence to them, and even, on occasion, insist that he follow them. The

elders have a direct interest in his adoption of the beliefs, not only as they

affect his interaction with them but also as they affect his interaction with

his peers (as when the mother invokes turn taking between her children

in order to reduce conflict that is costly to herself as well as to them). If the

social teachings are appropriate for the types of interdependence relationship and the other persons that the individual encounters, he will

find that the social beliefs are confirmed by his experience. The social

principles his parents recommend will prove to be useful in practice.

From their beneficial consequences and the social incentives provided for

their adoption the individual is likely to internalize the rules and criteria,

gaining some satisfaction or dissatisfaction from his adherence or nonadherence to them that is independent of their instrumental efficacy

in any particular interaction.

Our argument here is a functional one—that the patterns of interdependence make possible and, indeed, even require the learning of

value transformations. Because of their good consequences for him, in

terms of his basic given outcomes, the individual learns to deal with the

given pattern of interdependence as if it were a different pattern. This

learning is reflected in his tendencies to apply action criteria that take

account of the partner’s outcomes and to follow certain rules of timing

and sequencing in interaction.

Our approach is “functional” in the sense stated by Ralph Turner in an

unpublished manuscript:

Ideas, concepts, and imagery develop, persist, and seem vitally real

because in some fashion they help to facilitate action. Concepts arise

because using them makes a difference to those who employ them. This is

an application of the fairly commonplace functional approach employed by

such students as Dewey

. and Malinowsky

Our conclusion from this functional analysis is to be contrasted with

views that emphasize exclusively the prosocial or egoistic nature of man.

In our examination of the interdependence conditions for the acquisition

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

of social concepts and motives we find no basis for concluding that

altruistic or cooperative orientations are learned to a greater degree than

selfish and competitive ones. Ashley Montague asserts that

. the reproductive process is a cooperative one, and, in addition,

development as one of a litter or group of siblings represents another early

experience in the development of co-operation; development within a

family represents a still further experience in the learning and practice of

co-operation (1951, p. 46).

If our matrices can be taken as representing the patterns of interdependence within heterosexual relationships, between siblings, and

within families, we are required to disagree with Montague. If these

relationships include the dilemmas, conflicts, mixed interests, and types

of control reflected in the matrices (and we believe they do), it seems more

reasonable to conclude that they also provide experiences in the learning

and practice of distrust, competitiveness, and exploitation. At their best

the fruits of such learning are represented by an individual flexibly and

appropriately capable of both cooperative and competitive behavior.

Our analysis has focused on interdependence patterns as sites for

acquiring socially relevant values and behavioral tendencies, including

an ‘altruistic’ concern for the outcomes of others. The analysis assumes

that initially the person has an interest only in his own outcomes. It is

possible, as certain evolutionary theorists have argued (e.g., Hamilton,

1964; Trivers, 1974), that some of the prosocial transformational tendencies are innate and therefore present without the kind of learning we

have envisioned. We are in no position at present to specify the links

between these two approaches to the origins of prosocial behavior. A

basic similarity may be noted, however. The Trivers argument begins

with the ““mixed-motive” relation that exists between parent and offspring because they share some genes but not others. Whereas each

organism has an interest, so to speak, in perpetuating all of its own genes

(this being true from the viewpoint of natural selection processes), the

partial overlap of genes creates a selection pressure for behavioral tendencies that are partly prosocial and partly egoistic. Thus there is a

selection for some parental behavior that is altruistic toward the offspring

(e.g., initiating nurturant behavior during its vulnerable early life) but

also for some self-interested behavior (e.g., rejecting the offspring during

weaning which serves to preserve the mother’s health so that she may

pass on her genes to further progeny). The rough parallels to our analysis,

which points to the mixed-motive relationship as the crucial learning site

and implies the desirability of learning conditional behavior rules, will be

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

apparent to the reader. It is not inconceivable that the parallels are closer.

Thus the demands of interdependent social life that “select” for certain

behavior tendencies in the course of the individual's life may also have

selected genetically for humans with those tendencies or, at least, with

the aptitude for readily learning them.

EVIDENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS

As noted briefly in Chapter 1, the necessity for developing a theory of the

effective matrix and of the transformation processes that link it to the given

matrix is created by evidence that people commonly act in ways that are

inconsistent with their own immediate outcomes as specified in the

externally defined payoff structure of their relationship. As one of his

propositions about social motivation, McClintock (1972b) states that ’’. .

the attractiveness of outcomes for one actor may be influenced not only by

the outcomes he receives, but also the outcomes which he judges the

other(s) will receive” (p. 444). As exemplary evidence for this proposition

McClintock refers to consistent observations from the maximizing difference game that subjects choose the (counter-RC) alternative that, from

the point of view of the given values, is irrational. They do so because

they “. .

. define the value of outcomes to themselves not in terms of the

absolute number of points each receives, but in terms of how many points

more or less than the other player they attain” (p. 444); that is, they use

the max rel criterion. Given this definition of value, their choices in the

game represent a rational strategy. McClintock’s description of what we

call the transformation process is that”.

. an individual actor establishes

the final attractiveness of an outcome by considering and comparing both

own and other’s outcomes” (p. 445). He. notes that four outcome orientations have been suggested by empirical studies: maximization of own

gain, max joint, max rel, and max other.

In his important paper McClintock observes that choice behavior in a

situation of interdependence may reveal what the person intrinsically

values, his social motivation, or may be ’’a strategic response designed to

affect the other’s subsequent choices.

. .”” McClintock proposes that a

distinction be made between “choices that are means versus those that

are ends,” that is, between strategies and goals. In drawing this distinction, he implicitly raises the question: when can behavior inconsistent

with the given matrix be taken as evidence of a transformation?

In considering this question, we must first make clear that the payoffs

Officially specified, as by a salary schedule or the experimenter’s game

rules, may not define the given matrix. It is obvious that two persons may

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

attach different subjective values to the same objective outcomes, for

example, because of different states of satiation and need, different general comparison levels, or different degrees of boredom or fatigue with

the behaviors on which the rewards are contingent. The official schedule

only partly defines the given matrix because it is also a function of various

general psychological factors not related to the specific relationship. Thus

differences in reactions to a given official schedule are not to be equated

entirely with differences in transformations.

Setting aside that problem and assuming that we know the given matrix

(at least, locally), the problem that McClintock raises is that behavior may

depart from what is indicated by the given matrix either for strategic

reasons or because of the person’s social motivation. This is most clearly a

problem if behavior is part of a continuing relationship in which there will

be future interaction (the evidence bearing on this factor is presented in

the next section). For example, a person who benefits from an initial

allocation of rewards that favors him over his partner may be observed to

modify the allocation toward a more equal one (as by a side payment to

the partner). This action, however, may be profitable to the person in

terms of his own interest, permitting him to establish and/or maintain

good relations with his partner and thereby later to attain the goals

involved in that relationship; it may also enable the person to gain a

positive evaluation from some third person observing his actions and

thereby promote a relationship with that person that will serve important

purposes. The outcome-equalizing behavior is, according to this view, a

strategy to promote own gains and not attributable to the intrinsic satisfactions derived from equal outcomes (i.e., to an internalized value corresponding to a min diff transformation).

In this analysis McClintock points to an important problem, although

we are not comfortable with the terms in which he casts it. We believe the

domain of social motivation should be expanded to include rules of turn

taking and preemption as well as of giving weight to the partner’s outcomes, that is, to include sequential and transpositional transformations

as well as outcome transformations. This expansion ofthe domain would

incorporate with it certain acts that McClintock would view as strategic;

for example, when one person gives the other a first turn with the

expectation of having the second turn. We grant that the first turn may be

merely strategic, but it may also reflect the fact that turn taking is valued

in and of itself, just as maximizing the joint welfare may be.

Most important in our analysis of the functional value of transformations is the suggestion that the means-end distinction will generally

be blurred. From the actor’s point of view and in terms of the dynamics of

the choice situation there is usually no question whether a transORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

formational rule is followed for strategic ends or because it is valued in

and of itself. Both consequences are typically involved because the rules

(as the central concept we prefer rule to goal or motive) define modes of

behavior that are both effective and good. The strategy—goal dichotomy

reflects the common dilemma of the partner when, uncertain about the

future of the relationship, he wonders whether to attribute behavior to

the situation (available means for satisfying personal interests) or to the

person (stable motives). The partner’s question does not necessarily

provide the most fruitful distinction for the scientist, although perhaps

because he shares the observer perspective with the partner he is likely to

adopt it.

With regard to the operational problem of what constitutes evidence of

a transformation we find more useful the question of the total given matrix

within which behavior is to be interpreted. What is the real game—the

bigger game, if any—that the person is playing? Is cooperative behavior

in the PDG to be taken as reflecting a max joint transformation, elicited

strictly by the local structure of the PDG? (If so, the actor is likely to say

that it is the good and moral way to deal with the interdependence

problem and that it is the effective way for him to realize a good return

from the game. To repeat, the ends versus means aspect of the rule will

not be important to him.) Is the behavior to be taken as part of a larger

game in which positive appraisal from the experimenter is thought to be

attainable by cooperation (the 2 x 2 is imbedded in a larger N-person

game) or in which future good relations with the partner are thereby

ensured (the experimental series of interactions is imbedded in a more

extended time frame)? In the latter case if we know enough about the

larger given matrix we may be able to identify prosocial (and also egoistic)

transformational tendencies in the behavior; that is to say, simply because

a person treats the local game as part of a larger one does not mean that he

is necessarily pursuing only his self-interest (making no transformation)

in the larger context. Rules of max joint, turn taking, and so on, are just as

appropriate in a subject’s relations to the experimenter or in his extended

relationship with the partner as they are within the local confines of the

experimental game itself.

In general, then, we suggest that the appropriate question is whether

the person is acting (and possibly making a transformation) with respect

to the outcomes in the locally defined matrix or whether he is acting (and

possibly making a transformation) with respect to outcomes in a more

extensive game, that is, a game involving relations with other partners

and/or future interactions with the present partner. By the nature of

social life this question is difficult to answer. It involves those whom the

person believes to be the witnesses to his present behavior and what he

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

suspects may be the lasting evidence of that behavior. So little social life

occurs outside a larger social context (and, indeed, it may be none) that

the experimenter’s attempts to establish a context-free game situation run

counter to the subjects’ strong expectations and create puzzlement and

incredulity. Perhaps our greatest interpretive error will be to assume that

the narrow context usually encompassed by the investigator’s analysis

constitutes

the total context governing the experimental

subject’s

behavior.

EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

In this section we consider the conditions under which transformations

are evoked. These include the range of circumstances under which

people are induced to behave in ways different from those indicated by

the immediate given matrix. As indicated by the preceding discussion, it

will not always be clear from the circumstances whether the divergent

behavior reflects a transformation of that matrix or is oriented toward

(and possibly involves a transformation of) the relationship as more

extensively defined.

Information About Other’s Outcomes

The transformation process is set in motion by information about the total

pattern of interdependence, including both own and other’s outcomes.

As McClintock notes ’’. .

. to the extent that an individual is unaware that

he is in an interdependent relationship though he may be, he will assume

an own gain orientation .

. .”” (1972b, p. 451). Beyond simple awareness of

the interdependence, the person must have some conception of the

relation between his own and his partner’s outcomes. This conception

may be based on direct evidence or on his expectations and beliefs about

their respective outcomes for the given situation (see elapse 8 on perceiving the given matrix).

A number of studies appear to demonstrate the arousal of a max rel

transformation when each person has knowledge of his own and the

other’s outcomes. This seems to be clearly shown in the MDG, in which

the cooperative choice promises to maximize both own and joint outcomes, whereas the competitive choice promises to maximize the difference between own and other’s outcomes (max rel). Thus competitive

choices are made at the expense of some loss of own absolute outcomes

and reflect uniquely a motivation to gain an advantage over the other.

Increasing the salience of the difference between the two persons’

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

scores also seems to evoke max rel more strongly. McClintock and McNeel

(1966b) studied the effects in the MDG of displaying to each subject the

cumulative scores of both self and other as compared with the cumulative

scores for self only. The results are strong. Display of own and other’s

cumulative scores markedly increases the competitive response of choosing the max rel alternative. Here we must raise the issue discussed in the

preceding section. The effect of the cumulative score feedback may reflect

a process of imbedding the given game matrix in a broader one involving

outcomes from the experimenter. This would be the proper interpretation

of McClintock and McNeel’s results (and would throw in question what

transformation, if any, were being made) if it could be shown that the

cumulative display constitutes an implicit message to the subjects that the

experimenter is evaluating them in terms of who gets the higher score.

In considering further the tendency to choose the max rel alternative, it

is not clear whether the aim of this choice is to move ahead or simply to

catch up or avoid falling behind. If it is primarily the latter, then the

motive might be better described in relation to min diff. Messick and

Thorngate (1967) have developed an ingenious method for attempting to

answer this question. A two-choice game that permits the subjects to opt

for a relative gain was again used, and outcomes of both self and other

were displayed after each trial of the game. In this experiment, however,

the outcomes displayed to each of the two players were derived from

different payoff matrices. In this way it was possible in one treatment

(approach difference) to convey to each player that although he could

never receive less than the other for any joint choice he could occasionally

do better than the other. A subject’s choice of the alternative affording

this possibility is interpreted as reflecting a motivational orientation to

surpass the other. In another treatment (avoid difference) each player

perceived that although he could not surpass the other, one alternative

gave him the possibility of falling behind. His avoidance of this move

(i.e., his playing of the other move) then may be taken to reflect the

strength of his motivation to stay even. The results show that the motivation to avoid falling behind is significantly greater than that of surpassing the other. Furthermore, the former increases over time and the

latter remains constant at a relatively low level. Messick and Thorngate’s

results can be interpreted in terms of the combined effects of a strong max

rel and a weak min diff tendency. These augment each other in the

avoidance of falling behind and work against each other in the approach

to gaining an advantage. Alternatively, the results may imply that the max

rel transformation is nonlinear, similar to the nonlinear effects associated

with the comparison level (Chapter 6).

One could pose the similar question: is there greater motivation to catch

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

up if one finds himself behind or to stay ahead if one has the lead? In one

approach to answering this question McClintock and McNeel (1966b)

examined rates of making competitive (maximizing—difference) choices in

the MDG when the display of the cumulative choices of both players

showed the person to be behind the other one, ahead of him, or even.

These proportions which reflected a competitive orientation were .40 for

those behind, .44 for those ahead, and .12 for those who were even.

American college-student subjects made .50 competitive responses when

ahead and .35 when behind, whereas Belgian students made only .38

competitive responses when ahead and .45 when behind. The authors

tentatively interpret these rates as indicating that the Americans were

more strongly motivated to stay ahead than the Belgians, who were

relatively more concerned about being behind. As the authors acknowledge, these data must be interpreted with caution. Factors responsible for being ahead or behind are confounded with the situation of being

ahead or behind. It would seem preferable to make these comparisons for

each person to assess the degree to which his rate of competitive choices

changes as he moves from being ahead to being behind and vice versa.

Even better would be to arrange experimentally for some subjects to be

ahead and others to be behind. The latter approach has been taken by

Marwell, Ratcliff, and Schmitt (1969).

Marwell et al. conducted an experiment in two stages. In the first stage

two-thirds of the dyads (inequity condition) played a matrix game that

systematically and inevitably gave higher monetary outcomes to one of

the players; the remaining third of the dyads (equity condition) played a

form of the same game that gave equal outcomes to the two players.

In the second stage all dyads played the same MDG and everyone

kept his first-stage partner. Cumulative scores (including first-stage

scores) of both parties were presented on video. The dependent variable

was frequency of competitive play in the MDG during the second

stage.

In the inequity dyads those who found themselves behind were more

likely than those ahead to take the action that gave them an advantage

(i.e., enabling them to catch up). Those ahead did not, on the average,

play less competitively than subjects in the equity condition. The former,

however, were somewhat more tolerant of their partners’ competitive

moves, which is suggestive of a weak min diff orientation.

Using a similar method, Pepitone et al. (1970) obtained similar results in

the PDG. American and Italian students made more competitive choices

when they were arbitrarily caused to be behind than when they were

caused to be ahead. Those ahead played somewhat less competitively

(though not significantly so) than subjects in undifferentiated, control

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

dyads. Transitional probability data, which might reflect tolerance of the

disadvantaged person's attempts to catch up, are not available.

These studies provide some evidence, though not so strong as we

might wish, of min diff transformation that leads the disadvantaged

partner to initiate competitive behavior which tends to be unreciprocated

by the advantaged member. Max rel in general seems to be a much

stronger tendency in these experimental game settings, and the circumstances may not be the most favorable ones for observing the effects

of min diff.

Salience of Destructive Aspects of Conflict

Earlier we saw that prosocial transformations have functional value only

for patterns of intermediate correspondence. They are superfluous for

patterns of high correspondence and nonfuctional (even detrimental to

individual interest) for patterns of high noncorrespondence. On the

assumption that their use is learned with this discrimination, transformations should be evoked most dependably for the intermediate,

mixed-motive patterns. For more noncorrespondent patterns in which

the possibilities of destructive conflict are more salient they cannot be

counted on and explicit social processes will be necessary.

Typically, in gaming research no communication between the players

is permitted either before play has begun or during the intervals between

trials. When communication is not only permitted but encouraged, the

subjects have the opportunity to negotiate plans that vicariously and

imaginatively anticipate the consequences of alternative courses of

action. From the argument above this negotiation should reflect the

degree of conflict and be oriented toward ensuring the operation of

prosocial transformations or rendering them unnecessary.

Bonacich (1972) has conducted an experiment in which such discussions were encouraged. A series of five-person groups played an

extended version of the PDG for five trials under monetary incentives.

On the first trial all of the groups played exactly the same game. On

succeeding trials, however, half the groups (“high dilemma”) were presented PDGs that increased sharply from trial to trial in outcome noncorrespondence, whereas in the remaining half (‘low dilemma”) the

increase in noncorrespondence was slight. Thus the high dilemma

groups experienced a sharp rise over time in the temptation to make the

competitive (defecting, exploitative) move.

How did the high dilemma groups react to this potentially disruptive

temptation? As Bonacich predicted, their reaction was to invoke strong

normative

forces

to discourage

self-aggrandizing and competitive

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

behavior. In the discussion preceding each trial the high dilemma groups

adjured one another not to acquiesce to temptation, characterizing competitive behavior in evaluative terms such as “cheat,” ‘screw,” “greed,”

and “fink.” The frequency of use of such terms by these high dilemma

groups remained high throughout the five trials, whereas in the low

dilemma groups their use declined dramatically. Moreover, the high

dilemma groups did in fact succeed in mobilizing a strong resistance to

temptation. After each trial subjects were given this problem: “Assume

that everyone in the group has agreed to cooperate. What is the minimum

additional amount you would have to be offered before you would agree

to makea.

. noncooperative choice? Assume that you cannot share this

additional reward with the other members.”’ After the first trial a relatively constant percentage of low dilemma group members, never more

than 30%, said that they would have to be offered $20 or more to break the

agreement to cooperate. Among the high dilemma members, however,

this percentage increased steadily until by the last trial 82% would have to

be offered $20 or more to break the agreement.

This experiment by Bonacich provides evidence that when planning

and negotiation are possible the anticipation of the destructive consequences of conflict encourages the group to invoke moral norms that

entail max joint transformations. Whether these transformations will be

honored in the behavior of the group member depends on the degree of

noncorrespondence of their outcomes: plainly the conflict of interest may

become too intense to permit cooperative behavior. However, the process in the high dilemma groups may serve another purpose which is to

imbed the PDG in a larger relationship (one that extends beyond the

laboratory) in which correspondence is high enough that cooperative

game behavior can be expected even in the absence of prosocial transformations. Thus labeling the competitive behavior in strongly negative

terms may imply that a person had better not act in that manner if he

values the positive regard of his associates outside the laboratory. In

general, one way that social systems deal with local conflict is by imbedding it in larger patterns of interdependence in which there is greater

overall correspondence of outcomes.

An effect similar to that of Bonacich appears in the earlier research of

Thibaut and Faucheux (1965) and its subsequent variations (Thibaut,

1968), conducted in the setting of an asymmetrical relationship that

is basically the threat game. Here,

too, the negotiation and supplementation of transformations occurred mainly when the conflict of

interest was critically high. When one member of the dyad was strongly

tempted to be exploitative and self-aggrandizing and the other, disruptively disloyal, to defect, contractual agreements enforcing coopORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

eration were negotiated by most of the dyads. These contracts involved a

trade off between the first person’s min diff and the second person’s max

joint. It was in this condition also—of high conflict of interest—that the

parties agreed to impose the severest penalties for any contract violations.

This is a clear case of imbedding the conflict situation in an extended one

of greater common interest.

Future of the Relationship

Does anticipation of future interaction with a partner evoke a value

transformation? Marlowe, Gergen, and Doob (1966) report two studies

which suggest that it does. In their first study subjects played the PDG

against a predominantly cooperative partner. Half the subjects anticipated that they would subsequently meet with their partners to “’. .

discuss why you behaved as you did;” half had no expectation of a later

meeting. Those who anticipated future interaction played more cooperatively in the PDG than those not anticipating further interaction. This

finding suggests a straightforward effect of anticipated interaction in

eliciting a max joint transformation. Of course, it may also be interpreted

in terms of imbedding. The postgame discussion session enlarges the

matrix within which the game choices are made.

The second study revealed a complexity. When personal characteristics

of the opponent are revealed, this information may reverse the effects of

anticipated interaction. When the partner is perceived to be humble and

self-effacing, anticipated interaction works as it did in the first study to

increase cooperation. When the partner is perceived to be egotistical and

self-centered, however, one is less likely to cooperate with him when

future interaction is anticipated than when it is not.

Results similar to those in the second study of Marlowe et al. are

reported by Gruder (1971) ina bargaining study. When the opponent was

perceived to be fair and reasonable, subjects bargained more cooperatively with him (made more concessions) if future interaction was anticipated than if it was not, but when the opponent was perceived to be

exploitative and self-aggrandizing anticipation of future interaction had

the opposite effect; there was less cooperation when interaction was

anticipated than when it was not.

Hence from the last two studies it seems evident that anticipated

interaction does not simply and generally elicit a max joint transformation.

The transformation is contingent on perceived properties of the other

person. Descriptively, the results of the two studies suggest that subjects

take into account the properties of opponents whom they expect to meet

and that this appraisal causes them to make the transformations in their

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

experimental behavior that are appropriate to the larger relationship in

which the game is imbedded. If they expect to meet another who is

cooperative (humble, reasonable) this anticipation instigates a rehearsal

of cooperative behavior entailing a max joint transformation. If they expect

to meet another who is competitive (self-centered, exploitative), they

begin to rehearse competitive behavior that entails a max rel transformation. In other words, they adapt to the transformation the partner is

expected to make in the extended relationship just as subjects adapt to

their partner’s apparent transformations during game play (cf. below).

A different consequence of the extended game made possible by a

future relationship is suggested by the Morgan and Sawyer (1967) experiment. Subjects were 10-to-12-year-old boys, all classmates. Pairs of

friends and pairs of nonfriends bargained for monetary outcomes on a

“bargaining board,’” which systematically favored one member of each

pair. Generally, the pairs adhered to a norm of strict equality of outcomes

(min diff). This was uniformly true for nonfriends, but it was true among

friends only when the disadvantaged boy could inform his partner of his

wish for equality. When information about the most desired settlement

could not be transmitted, agreements between friends moved toward

maximizing joint outcomes, with the advantaged boy gaining a larger

share of the total outcome. A plausible interpretation is that friends

(having a future of turn taking and exchange that works like a present side

payment) are able to tolerate a momentary inequality, especially when it

is created by an artificial advantage to one member that produces a larger

joint outcome. The disadvantaged member is confident of being reimbursed later and the advantaged member feels no awkwardness about his

future obligations; that is, about being forced to be nice later on. In brief,

max joint can be given priority within the local game because the pair can

assume that min diff will also, over subsequent interaction, be satisfied.

Evaluation Apprehension

Just as the context provided by anticipations of later encounters with the

partner may evoke value transformations, so may that provided by the

wider community, especially the community of peers, with whom relationships have both a future and a history and within which a “reputation” matters. When its presence is salient, physically or symbolically,

and it communicates an evaluative message either explicitly or tacitly,

dyadic members can be expected to respond with appropriate value

transformations.

Some of these effects are shown in an experiment by Brown (1968). Ina

first phase male adolescents played the Deutsch and Krauss trucking

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

game against a competitively programmed confederate. In the conditions

relevant to the present discussion all subjects believed that they were

being observed through a one-way mirror by a group of their classmates.

At the conclusion of the first phase subjects received handwritten comments from the fictitious audience which described the subject as appearing either foolish (“weak,” ‘a sucker”) or not foolish (“fair,”” “played it

straight’’).

In the second phase all subjects had an opportunity to retaliate: they

now controlled the gate to the shorter one-way road and could charge

tolls for passage through the gate. The charging of tolls, however, was

costly to the subject himself, and the higher the toll, the greater the cost to

self. Finally, half the subjects were led to believe that their opponent

knew their costs for toll charging and half believed their opponents to be

innocent of this knowledge.

The results show that when a person is made to look weak and foolish

in full view of an audience of his peers he will retaliate strongly against the

source of his humiliation. He will retaliate with heightened intensity

when he believes his opponent is ignorant of his costs. If he knows that

his opponent knows how badly the retaliation is hurting both of them, the

zeal for it cools. When the audience reaction to him has been favorable

(when he is viewed as fair), his retaliation is much reduced, although his

opponent treated him just as badly as the humiliated subject.

It is tempting to conclude that public humiliation evokes a min other

transformation because retaliation is made in the face of high cost to self;

but since retaliation is suppressed when the opponent is aware of this

high cost it may be more likely that the transformation aroused is max rel.

When the audience evaluation is favorable, competitive transformations

appear to be inhibited and a max own transformation is maintained,

tinged (perhaps) with max joint.

Research by Madsen and his colleagues also suggests the effects of the

peer culture on game behavior. Two examples of this research will suffice

to illustrate the point. Madsen and Shapira (1970) studied groups of

children of both sexes, 7 to 9 years old, from a rural Mexican village and

from three urban Los Angeles samples: Mexican-American,

AfroAmerican, and Anglo-American. Four children of the same sex and

ethnic group were seated at the four corners of the Madsen Cooperation

Board. A circle was located on the board near each child and a child wona

prize each time a movable stylus crossed into his circle. Attached to the

stylus were four strings each held by one of the children; therefore the

stylus could be moved only if one or two of the children pulled his string

while the others released theirs; any subset of the group could prevent the

others from obtaining prizes. Hence only by coordinated action could

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

prizes be won. The differences in the play of this game were dramatic.

Groups from the three urban samples exhibited so much competitiveness

that hardly any prizes were won. Groups from the rural village, however,

showed a steadily increasing, systematic cooperation that yielded many

prizes.

Using the same Cooperation Board, Shapira and Madsen (1969)

studied 6-to-10-year-old Israeli children of both sexes, some from three

different kibbutzim and some from a middle-class urban community.

With a procedure similar to that used in the American study, the results

again were clear cut. As in the Los Angeles samples, the urban children

had great difficulty in coordinating, but the kibbutz children, like the

rural Mexican children, quickly developed a systematic scheme for coordinating their actions. They also showed a great concern about equality in

winning the prizes (“Everyone should get the same’”’).

It seems reasonable to interpret the results of these two studies as

reflecting normative pressures from preexisting and enduring relationships in the peer group (and possibly beyond). In the closely knit

collective life of the kibbutz and the rural village norms that protect the

welfare of the total group and that strongly discourage self-aggrandizing

or exploitative behavior are likely to develop. In the city life is much less

likely to be lived in an all-encompassing and monolithic enclave, and

partners in an experimental session are likely to belong to only partly

overlapping groups. Moreover, the norms that do develop will reflect the

(putative) requirements for surviving in a city—the strength to compete

in a succession of disparate encounters.

Hence it may be concluded that the extraexperimental context provided

by urban life generally aroused a max rel transformation among the urban

children. The rural and kibbutz children appear to be strongly under the

control of a max joint transformation and also, particularly among the

kibbutz children, a constraint toward min diff. Once again, however, the

effects may reflect an imbedding of the experimental game in the larger

game of life. The reputation one makes through game behavior, especially in the village, is likely to have implications for one’s outcomes in

extragame domains of interdependence.

A discussion of evaluation apprehension would be incomplete without

raising th2 question of the effects of the subjects’ perceptions of the

experimeriter’s expectations. The experimenter is an omnipresent audience to game behavior and he can be assumed to be evaluating that

behavior in terms of certain explicit criteria. Little is known about subjects’ perceptions of these matters. Their interdependent relationship

with the experimenter (whether his evaluation matters to them, whether

he has any extragame power over them, what they sense to be his

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

dependence on them) is particularly uncertain. Almost every dyadic

experiment lends itself to interpretation in terms of the larger subject-experimenter context within which the intersubject relationship

exists. This problem has been perceptively discussed by Alexander and

Weil (1969).

The Partner’s Apparent Transformation

The theoretical analysis shows that the value of most transformations

depends not only on the pattern of interdependence but also on the

transformation the partner makes. Consistent with this is a great deal

of experimental work on subjects’ reactions to different programmed

partners. The general result for the PDG (Oskamp, 1971) is that subjects

respond somewhat competitively to consistently cooperative partners

and strongly competitively to consistently competitive ones. The former

probably reflects the joint effects of (a) the benefits in the given PDG

matrix to be gained from using a max own or max rel criterion when the

partner is using one that is max joint and (b) a tendency among some

subjects to reciprocate a max joint transformation. The response to the

consistently competitive partner is ambiguous regarding what transformation, if any, is involved. In the absence of alternative responses

even the person who is interested in cooperation (max joint) may find it

unacceptable to continue to attempt to cooperate in the face of the

partner’s persistent refusal to do so. The subject tends to be most cooperative when the programmed partner is cooperative but contingently so,

depending on the subject’s own cooperativeness. Thus, as would be

expected from the mutual benefits to be gained from a bilateral max joint

transformation, many subjects will shift toward cooperative behavior if

the partner (a) refuses to be exploited and (b) shows willingness to be

cooperative too.

One of the few studies in which transformations have been directly

assessed during the course of interaction is that of Pruitt (1970). He found

that subjects’ description of their objectives as “helping the other person

make as much money as possible,’ a max other criterion, increased over

trials with cooperative input from the other and decreased over trials with

competitive input. We may infer that the partner’s behavior indicates his

transformation (cf. Chapter 8) and, accordingly, that Pruitt’s data show

the process of adjusting one’s own transformation to that of the partner.

Transformations Made by Social Models

Actors are influenced in their transformations not only by their partners

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

but also by the transformations they observe social models to make. This

is undoubtedly an important part of the process by which transformational tendencies are learned. The learning, as well as the subsequent evocation, is probably most effective when the model is in an

interdependence situation similar to that subsequently facing the person

himself. An illustration of the modeling process (and it is not clear

whether it involves the learning of a transformation—as the investigators

believe—or the evocation of one) is provided by an experiment by

Aronfreed and Paskal, reported in Aronfreed (1968). These authors

designed a “prototype’”’ sequence of three phases that produced sympathetic behavior in 7-to-8-year-old girls. The girls individually performed a task requiring the pushing of one of three levers mounted on a

choice-box to make a classification of various stimulus objects (toy

replicas of real objects) according to whether they were most appropriate

for a house (left lever), a dog (middle lever), or a school (right lever). The

middle lever was in fact almost always inappropriate because the

stimulus objects included almost no dog-relevant items.

Several experimental conditions were created, each consisting of three

phases of activity. In the prototype condition designed to produce sympathetic behavior (and successful in doing so) the first phase was

intended to link the child’s own direct experience of pain with observed

cues of another person’s experience of the same distress. Child and

experimenter sat opposite one another. Both wore earphones that were

attached to the choice-box on the pretext of monitoring noise from within

the box. The child was instructed that any noises that might occur would

be louder in the experimenter’s earphones than in her own. During some

of the intertrial intervals following the child’s classification decisions the

child heard a highly aversive loud noise. The occurrence of this noise was

unpredictable and not contingent on which lever was pushed. Just before

the noise began the experimenter lowered her head in her hands as a

distress cue (as though she could already hear the noise), continuing to

show this cue until the noise heard by the child was terminated.

In the second phase of the prototype condition the child continued to

wear the earphones. The experimenter, now without earphones, sat

beside the child and used a second choice-box to make her own classifications after the child had made hers. She told the child that she might

be able to use her box to turn off the noise that the child might continue to

hear. Each time the child had made her classification of a toy replica the

experimenter poised her hand over her own choice-box as though pondering her decision. The two outside levers were clearly the correct ones

for almost all the toys and on half the classification trials the experimenter

did choose an outside lever. On the other half the child again began to

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

hear the unpredictable noise. On these trials the experimenter quickly

pushed the middle lever, turning off the noise in the child’s earphones

and announcing that as her intention. Thus the experimenter’s middlelever response entails some small cost to her while relieving the child’s

considerable pain, as in Phase II of Figure 7.5.

The third phase of the prototype condition tested the child’s tendency

to reproduce the sympathetic response. Another girl, a trained confederate, now wore earphones. The subject, earphones removed, was

assigned the role of using the second choice-box to classify each toy,

following its classification by the confederate. For half the trials, just

before the subject made her choice, the confederate placed her head in her

hands, terminating this distress cue if the true subject made the taskinappropriate sympathetic choice of the middle lever. Choice of the

middle lever during this third phase was thus the dependent measure of

altruistic behavior. The subject’s own middle-lever response entailed

some small cost to her, while relieving the confederate’s considerable

pain, as in Phase III of Figure 7.5. The use of the middle response thus

reflects a tendency to given consideration to the other person’s outcomes,

as in a max other transformation. Its use by the children experiencing the

prototype series of events shows the influence of the model provided by

Experimenter

Middle

Other

Phase II

response

response

ae ae

Confederate

Phase III

Middle

response

Subject

Other

response

Figure 7.5 |

Twophases of the experimental procedure followed by Aronfreed and Paskal.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the experimenter’s behavior in relation to the interdependence position

in which the child later found itself.

Type and Amount of Incentive

In commenting on the research by Madsen and his associates, it was

noted that different implicit meanings seemed to be attached to competition and cooperation at the two different kinds of site—urban and

rural. Among the rural and kibbutz children there were likely to have

been strong normative pressures that defined cooperation as the good

and moral behavior and competition as bad and immoral. Among the

urban children

the predominantly aggressive behavior may have

reflected a conception of social life in which the competitive response is

the strong response necessary for survival and the max rel transformation

is regarded as acceptable for a wide range of interpersonal situations.

These two orientations correspond to the two dimensions or factors

that differentiated sites in a transnational study of negotiation conducted

in three laboratories in Europe and five in the United States (Kelley,

Shure, et al., 1970). The same experimental procedure was followed at all

eight sites. Pairs of subjects were fully instructed in the rules and procedures of a bargaining game in which it was possible for each member

to insure himself modest outcomes by direct unilateral action, but to

attain large outcomes a cooperative strategy entailing a lengthened time

perspective was necessary. Half the pairs at each site played for points

and half played for rather substantial amounts of money. After the rules

and procedures were clearly understood the subjects indicated privately

on a series of bipolar scales how they expected the typical player would

behave in the game and how they themselves expected to behave. These

pregame ratings were factor analyzed to identify the main dimensions of

“connotative’’ meaning (Osgood, Suci, and Tannenbaum, 1957). Two

clear factors emerged: evaluative (E) and dynamism (D). Further analysis of

these factors showed that cooperation versus competition had different

connotative meanings at the different sites, reflected in the factor that the

cooperative-competitive scale was associated with at a particular site.

When associated with the E-factor, cooperation meant good, moral, and

honest, whereas competition meant bad, immoral, and dishonest. When

associated with the D-factor, cooperation meant weak and passive,

whereas competition meant strong and active.

At all sites subjects cooperated more effectively under the money

incentive than under points. They also cooperated more at sites characterized by dominance of the D-factor than at those dominated by the

E-factor. Furthermore, it was observed that

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

- money tends to make the situation one in which cooperationcompetition means Dynamism

. rather than Evaluation.

. This more

subtle effect seems to be that the situation becomes a more instrumental or

task-like one with money and more interpersonal or moral in its implications

when the incentive is merely points (p. 434).

The moral orientation of the E-factor causes the person to construe a

competitive response as being motivated by bad and immoral designs

and such responses should be punished with indignation and selfrighteousness. In the more instrumental orientation of the D-factor such

responses mean that the other is making a strong and active attempt to

deal with a difficult task and the counterresponse is likely to carry the

same motivation. Similarly, under a point incentive the competitive

response encodes the meaning that the other intends to beat you and

perhaps even to humiliate you, whereas an opponent who makes a

competitive response to gain money is more likely to be perceived to be

under the control of a legitimate external pressure that carries no personal

overtones.

It seems plausible that the types of relationship for which money*

facilitates cooperation by giving an instrumental character to interpersonal strategies are those in which cooperative behavior dependably

improves outcomes. When the cooperative alternative is the risky or

vulnerable one, instrumental considerations will dictate the adoption of

other, for example, competitive lines of action. This suggests two related

hypotheses concerning the kinds of relationship in which the type of

incentive and its magnitude will affect tendencies to cooperate by evoking

transformations.

1. Money evokes a max joint transformation for matrix patterns in which

max joint is a viable transformation and money evokes a max rel transformation for patterns in which max rel is an advantageous transformation, given that the other person has made (or may be thought to

make) a prosocial (e.g., a max joint) transformation.

2. The greater the magnitude of money, the stronger the arousal of the

max joint transformation for all matrix patterns in which max joint is a

viable transformation.

From the data presently available it does not appear possible to evaluate these two hypotheses but there seems to be no disconfirming evi* More generally, by money we mean any item of value that can be accumulated and

transported (without losing its value) outside the interactive situation—hence prizes of

candy and the like would be included in this conception. Points per se, on the other hand,

cannot be transported and have no value apart from what they symbolize in the situation.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

dence. The evidence for hypothesis 2 seems straightforward within the

range of situations that are relevant to test it. McClintock and McNeel

(1966a, 1966b, 1967) report a series of experiments with the MDG in which

monetary incentives were varied from relatively trivial to substantial

amounts. The MDG is a game that structurally provides sufficient outcome correspondence to make unnecessary a max joint transformation.

However, max joint serves to reinforce max own as a means to good given

outcomes. Furthermore, max rel yields no advantage (in terms of given

outcomes); therefore, if money heightens the importance of the given

outcomes, it should suppress the max rel tendency. The results clearly

indicate that subjects make significantly more cooperative responses

under high monetary incentives than under low ones. Furthermore, the

difference in cooperative responding was mainly attributable (McClintock and McNeel, 1966a) to the high incidence of cooperation among high

incentive subjects after both members had made a cooperative response

on the preceding trial. This ‘‘state-conditioned propensity” to increase

the incidence of cooperation after both had exhibited cooperation

suggests the importance of being reassured that the partner is also

responsive to the given outcomes and is not making a max rel transformation.

Most of the research on incentives has varied money versus points (or

imaginary money), hence is potentially relevant to hypothesis 1. The bulk

of the research is concerned with the PDG. Although, as we have seen,

joint outcomes are maximized by cooperative play, individual outcomes

are not; the cooperative alternative is the joint solution but it entails a risk

of exploitation. Therefore it would not be surprising if a monetary incentive did not consistently improve cooperation. The results are in fact

uneven. Radlow, Weidner, and Hurst (1968) report heightened cooperation under a monetary incentive, whereas Gumpert, Deutsch, and

Epstein (1969) report the opposite effect. Evans (1964) and Wrightsman

(1966) report no differences, although their subjects played the game for

only six and two trials respectively.

Other bits of evidence appear to be consistent with the hypothesis.

Although it represents a complex situation, the trucking game of Deutsch

and Krauss (1965) would seem to be one in which a cooperative arrangement could be negotiated with reasonable dependability and Gallo (1966)

has found a substantial monetary incentive to improve cooperation over

the rates obtained with imaginary money. Finally an experiment by

Daniels (1967) provides a reasonable test of both parts of hypothesis 1

—that money will arouse a max joint transformation for patterns in which

max joint is viable but that it will arouse a max rel transformation when that

is advantageous, given the other person might make a prosocial transORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

formation. In a simple exchange relationship in which the cooperative

alternative was a dependable way of increasing outcomes, subjects under

a monetary incentive cooperated more than those under a point incentive. When, however, the nature of the exchange relationship was modified to permit the exploitation of cooperative overtures, the monetary

incentive impaired cooperation.

Decomposition

The logic and method of decomposing the PDG (Pruitt, 1967, 1970) and

other matrices were outlined in Chapter 2. There it was shown that there

is an indefinitely large number of ways of specifying and presenting to

subjects the BRC component (your gains) and the MFC component

(other’s gains) in the PDG. A PDG matrix and three decomposed versions

of it were presented in Figure 2.8.

Is there any evidence that these different ways of presenting the same

matrix elicit different value transformations? The answer, provided by

Pruitt’s (1967) results, is a resounding “yes.” The rate of the C choice (the

“cooperative” choice) was about 50% for the matrix version of the game,

consistent with other studies of this matrix. In contrast, Game II began at

50% but declined over trials to 10 to 20%, Game III was consistently at the

70 to 90% level, and Game IV moved over trials from the 50% level to 70 to

80%. Clearly, the particular way in which the given relationship was

analyzed for the subjects had a great effect on their behavior within it.

Pruitt’s second study (1970) draws on questions about goals, strategy,

and satisfaction with partner’s choices to determine what the basis for the

different results might be. Game II, in which the choice is between (C) 6

points each for self and other and (D) 12 for self but —6 for other, was

found to elicit an interest in the high (12 point) outcome along with, for

some subjects, an interest in the fair division (via C). The latter min diff

transformation is fragile and disappears when the partner chooses D.

Game III, with a choice between (C) 12 points for the other and (D) 6

points for self, elicits the goal of achieving cooperation from the partner so

that the large outcome (12) can be obtained. This interest persists in the

face of some D choices by the partner. Game IV, witha choice between (C)

18 for other but —6 for self and (D) 6 for other, similarly creates an interest

in the high outcome. This is initially offset by fear of the negative outcome

but this fear disappears as the partner occasionally plays C.

Overall, these results suggest that subjects respond selectively to the

highest component outcome delineated by decomposition. It must be

questioned, then, whether they recompose the game, that is, whether

they add up the components and respond to the total interdependence

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

pattern. In addition, the results may reflect a transformational tendency

not yet considered in our scheme. This is a tendency to ‘go for” one’s

own highest outcomes. This tendency can be described as a special nonlinear transformation of the max own criterion and might suggest that

especially great weight is given to the highest outcomes in the matrix

in setting one’s comparison level for that matrix.

DISPOSITIONAL SOURCES OF TRANSFORMATIONS

McClintock gives as one of his propositions about social motivation that

“Individuals vary in terms of their likelihood to adopt one of the four

motivational orientations across settings in which there is outcome interdependence” (1972b, p. 453). The different sorts of people we consider

here are a selected set of those for whom some evidence exists about the

kinds of transformation they are likely to make. We commence with sex

differences.

Terhune (1970) has reviewed the sex differences found in gaming and

bargaining research and his major conclusions can be paraphrased as

follows: when women are confronted with a conflict between their own

interests and those of another, they search for an accommodative solution. If possible, they will seek to compromise and to avoid open competition. Their initial orientation is to cooperate and they will do so if from

the beginning the other is cooperative, but if they are crossed they will

respond to the exploitation with greater retaliation and apparent vindictiveness than will men. In contrast, when men encounter a partner

who is highly cooperative from the beginning, they tend to exploit him.

Men are more likely to adopt a tit-for-tat strategy and are more cooperative in response to such a strategy.

These differing orientations have a familiar ring: they sound very much

like the differences between the E-factor and D-factor orientations of

Kelley, Shure, et al. (1970) reviewed in the preceding section (p. 196).

Women appear to adopt a r:oral-evaluative (E-factor) orientation and

men,

an instrumental,

task-oriented

(D-factor)

orientation.

Before

elaborating on this interpretation we need to make note of another

variable that has been shown to be related to value transformation.

In their research on Machiavellianism Christie and Geis (1970) have

found that subjects differing in scores on the Mach scale show contrasting

behaviors in a variety of bargaining and gaming situations. In one study

triads composed of one subject scoring high on the Mach scale (high

Mach), one in the middle range, and one low Mach played a modification

of the coalition game of Vinacke and Arkoff (1957). High Machs outORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

bargained low Machs and won more points. High Machs were even more

successful when the ambiguity of the game was heightened (i.e., when

the relative weights given each player were kept secret, as in a poker

hand). High Machs appeared to depersonalize the situation, approaching

it as a problem to be solved by cognitive-probabilistic strategies. Low

Machs, on the other hand, invested the interaction with a strongly

personal tone and responded in a more emotional and moralistic way.

Under other conditions, however, the high Machs are more cooperative than the low Machs. Consider another experiment reported in the

same book. The game was Chicken. On the first 10 trials all subjects

played for points; on the next 10 trials half the subjects played for pennies

and half for dollars (enabling them to win as much as 4 dollars per trial).

All subjects played against a programmed other who always followed the

same predominantly cooperative noncontingent strategy. On the first 10

trials the high and low Machs played about the same way—competitively

on roughly 55% of the occasions. When money was introduced, the low

Machs continued to play competitively, whereas the high Machs shifted

significantly to a more cooperative strategy, particularly when they were

playing for dollars.

From the results of these two experiments it seems clear that the high

Machs compete aggressively when it is to their immediate advantage (as

in the

K-sum coalition game), but they also cooperate when that appears

to be advantageous (in Chicken with a monetary incentive). Low Machs

appear to have little tactical or strategic orientation. In a further study,

reported in the same book, there is evidence that low Machs do understand bargaining situations intellectually, but in games having emotional

issues they become distracted by their ego-involvement (e.g., they lost

most on issues they most strongly endorsed). High Machs remained

detached from such issues and concentrated on winning.

Again there is an apparent parallel between these orientations and

those discussed earlier. The orientation of high Machs resembles that of

male subjects and the orientation of low Machs resembles that of females

(and women do score significantly lower than men on the Mach scales,

according to Christie and Geis). Furthermore, these orientations appear

to be similar to those induced by money versus points and by the D-factor

versus the E-factor. Indeed, it is tempting to conclude that money versus

points, men versus women, and high Mach versus low Mach all act in the

same way to produce a D-factor or an E-factor orientation. This would

have the further consequence that the former creates basically a max own

transformation which then stimulates a max joint transformation when

max joint improves own outcomes (as in patterns with relatively high

outcome-correspondence) and a max rel transformation when (in less

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

correspondent patterns) the other person can be induced to make a

prosocial overture. However, the conditions that would be hypothesized

to produce the E-factor orientation (points, women, low Mach) are

heterogeneous in at least some of their effects. Points are not like femaleness and low Mach in creating an initial tendency toward cooperation,

but points, women, and low Mach are alike in investing the relationship

with a personal and moralistic meaning that leads to vindictive responding (a max rel or min other transformation) to the other’s competition.

We have not speculated here about the possible origins of these differences in transformational dispositions, but we do note the approach to

this problem thatis afforded by our theoretical analysis. The basicassumption is that transformational tendencies are acquired by experience in

situations of social interdependence. This experience may be direct or

vicarious (provided by social models) and is supplemented (and, perhaps

to some degree, supplanted) by explicit teachings of social rules and

behavior. The learning experience will depend on the patterns of interdependence within which one interacts and the transformational tendencies of the partners with whom one interacts. Thus we would seek to

explain sex differences in transformation tendencies by reference to differences between male and female children in the distribution of interdependence patterns in which they have their social interaction (including the literal games they play) and in the transformational tendencies

their partners most commonly manifest. It would be necessary, of course,

to take account also of different normative teachings to which the sexes

are exposed. Yet we would expect these teachings to be effective only

within some limits set by the youngster’s experience in social interdependence.

THE GENERAL THEORY OF TRANSFORMATIONS:

THE SELF-REGULATION OF MOTIVATION

The notion of transformational tendencies that are learned through interdependence experience is not original with us. McClintock observes that

. because of this interdependence, which begins very early in life, the

child learns to define, compare, and evaluate his behavioral alternatives not

only in terms of their implications for achieving his own preferred ends, but

also in terms of their implication for the outcomes that will be afforded

others (1972b, p. 438).

He refers to “‘the final attractiveness of an outcome” and two investigators influenced by McClintock refer to ‘the effective structure” a

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

game has for subjects (Kuhlman and Marshello, 1975). Similar concepts

and suggestions can be found in other writings in the literature on

experimental games.

As much as we owe our transformational viewpoint to McClintock’s

research and writings, it differs from his “social motivation” approach in

a number of respects. Perhaps most important is that our analysis points

to a diversity of transformations not encompassed by the social motivation view. In addition to outcome transformations (which correspond

to the “social motives’’), there are others that are transpositional and

sequential. Our analysis gives the same status to, say, turn taking as to

max joint. Once the notion of sequential transformations is introduced,

the distinction between means and ends (McClintock’s goal versus

strategy) becomes blurred. As we noted earlier, the benefit that A provides B as the first step in a turn-taking sequence might be viewed as a

mere strategic move, done out of consideration of A’s long-term personal

interests. Yet it can be done with a sense that “turn-taking is something

good we ought to do” and with no more sense that “‘it’s the only way I'll

ever get what I want” than using a max joint criterion in the PDG. In other

words, turn taking is no different as a rule for social behavior than max

joint. Both may (and, we would emphasize, do) involve mixtures of

means and ends properties.

More generally our view regarding prosocial transformation is that (a)

all such transformations are of instrumental value in some situations; (b)

all have social norms associated with them [the norm of reciprocity

(Gouldner, 1960) associated with turn taking is a prime example]; (c)

all provide a basis for conflict avoiding or conflict settling persuasive

appeals and explicit agreements (cf. Chapter 10); and (d) by virtue of their

functional value all are represented to some degree as internalized tendencies. They are learned as “rules” rather than as ‘‘goals.”” As rules, they

have a high degree of contingent, situation-specific applicability. They

are not (as implied by the terms goal or motive) stable sources of

behavioral causality with high generalizability across situations. They do

not cease to have functional value or strategic benefits for the actor simply

because they become internalized. Consequently, they define modes of

behavior that, subjectively, have both practical and moral worth.

Our discussion of transformations does not begin to exhaust the list of

behavioral tendencies that people learn in situations of interdependence.

In our earlier work (Thibaut and Kelley, 1959) we summarized evidence

that suggested that some people are overresponsive to the reward aspects

of interpersonal relations and others, to the cost aspects. This can be

described in terms of transformational tendencies that operate selectively

with regard to different components of own outcomes, max own being

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

differentiated into max rew versus min cost components. In the earlier book

we speculated that these different tendencies derive from the person’s

experience in social situations of uncertain outcomes and may reflect his

competency and success. These tendencies would affect the values in the

given matrix, hence might be distinguished from the transformations

emphasized here. Like the present transformations, however, the reward

versus cost orientation might also be evoked by the pattern of the given

matrix; for example, when a person focuses more on his rewards when

outcome correspondence is seen to be high but more on his costs when

outcomes are noncorrespondent.

Another transformation of own outcomes that may have high functional value for persons in certain relationships is the suppression of

interest in own outcomes. If a person can learn to “do without,” to forgo

many common rewards, he reduces his dependence on others. This can

also be viewed as a means of placing a limitation on the power of other

people. Viewed in this way, it constitutes the transformational route to

what Homans describes as “the display of indifference’”’ (1974, p. 88)

which makes a person appear powerful. As we have emphasized

throughout this chapter, a rule that has practical effectiveness (e.g., as a

power strategy) may also be internalized, in this case serving truly to

increase the -person’s independence of socially mediated rewards. In

terms of the component analysis described in earlier chapters the suppression of responsiveness to rewards might operate primarily with

respect to the FC and BC to which the person is vulnerable, this being

possible to the degree to which the kinds of rewards involved are different from those in the RC component.

The phenomenon of commitment may also be conceptualized in transformational terms. It is central toa number of processes of concern in this

book, often being essential to the transpositional process (preemption)

described in Chapter 6 and playing an important role in the development

of stable relations (Chapter 8). Commitment involves a promise never (or

during some specified time period) to look at or consider certain alternatives (either certain behavioral alternatives, as im the preemptive

strategy, or certain alternative partners, as in committing oneself to a

particular relationship). The promise is psychologically viable if the person can manage to put these alternatives out of attention or consideration

so that the rewards associated with them are no longer effective.

The concept of commitment is closely related to that of decision. As

noted in Chapter 11, Lewin conceptualized a decision in terms of an

increase in the potency of one of the several overlapping situations

corresponding to the various conflicting goals. The increase in potency of

one of the situations can be considered a type of transformation. At the

ORIGIN AND EVOCATION OF TRANSFORMATIONS

decision point the person makes up his mind and puts the rejected

alternatives out of consideration. The functional value of this transformation derives from its promoting more effective action than would be

possible if the person persisted in thinking about the total set of alternatives. The reader will recognize the affinity of these ideas to the concept

of a postdecisional dissonance reduction process (Festinger, 1957) and to

the notion of unequivocal behavioral orientation or UBO (Jones and

Gerard, 1967). In general, we believe a fruitful line of theoretical work

would be to consider such concepts as these from the point of view of the

types of behavioral situation for which they have functional value. A

taxonomy of such situations and a functional analysis of the various

relevant motivational concepts (tension system, dissonance, decision,

commitment, UBO, and reactance) might suggest a coherent framework

within which apparently diverse phenomena can be located and synthesized. This would constitute a theoretical investigation of the processes

and tendencies involved in relation to the impersonal environment, an

investigation analogous to the present analysis of the rules and procedures involved in relating to other people. For more on this point see

Chapter 11.

Finally (although, again, we do not pretend to exhaust the domain of

transformational phenomena), the ability to forego immediate rewards in

favor of later ones—to delay gratification—is important in interdependent relationships. It is obviously essential to the process of turn

taking during which the person must occasionally put off satisfying his

own needs in order to permit the partner to satisfy his. Through its

facilitation of the turn-taking sequence, the ability to delay gratification

enables both persons to attain higher eventual outcomes in patterns of

noncorrespondence (e.g., the turn-taking game) than they would if both

maintained short time perspectives.

In his summary of the evidence regarding the antecedents of delay of

gratification Mischel (1974) includes social interdependence learning settings of the sort the present perspective would emphasize (e.g., relationships in which other persons have kept their promises of future

rewards). In the present discussion Mischel’s writings are more important in providing the general theoretical context within which our analysis of transformations is located. He observes that ‘’the meaning and

impact of a stimulus can be modified dramatically by cognitive transformations” (1973, p. 260). The transformations determine how long a

child will be able to wait for a preferred but delayed outcome. Thus the

child confronted with actual pretzel sticks or marshmallows can wait

longer (in order to obtain more of them) if he “cognitively transforms the

stimulus, for example, by thinking about the pretzel sticks as little brown

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

logs or by thinking about the marshmallows as round white clouds or as

cotton balls.

. .’” (p. 260). In contrast, his ability to wait is less if he focuses

cognitively on the consummatory properties of the objects (e.g., how

they taste). From the present perspective these observations are highly

suggestive of the kinds of perceptual and cognitive mechanism that make

possible outcome transformations.

At a more general level Mischel’s characterization of cognitive transformations has many parallels to our assumptions about the process.

Cognitive transformations involve selective attention to and interpretation of certain aspects of the objective stimulus. In our examples the

person focuses on certain aspects of the interdependence pattern and

interprets

his behavioral

alternatives

in a temporal

or sequential

framework.

Cognitive transformations

substantially

alter the

impact the stimulus exerts on behavior

. .”” (p. 267). In our analysis

transformations loosen the linkage between immediate stimuli and

behavior by enabling the person to respond to a given interdependence

matrix as if it were a different one. In this attenuating and modulating role

cognitive transformations are part of the self-regulatory system. ‘The

‘essence of self-regulatory systems is the subject’s adoption of contingency

rules that guide his behavior in the absence of, and sometimes in spite

of, immediate external situational pressures” (p. 274). In his summary

Mischel writes that

. individual's self-regulatory systems include: the rules that specify goal

or performance standards in particular situations; the consequences of

achieving or failing to achieve those criteria; self-instructions and cognitive

stimulus transformations to achieve the self control necessary for goal

attainment; and organizing rules (plans) for the sequencing and termination of complex behavioral patterns in the absence of external supports

and, indeed, in the face of external hindrances (p. 275).

Itis unnecessary to note the specific parallels this list finds in our concepts

of comparison level and the several varieties of transformation. Mischel’s

statement makes clear what has been only implicit in our analysis,

namely, the self-regulatory role of the transformations. They free the

person from the control of the given matrix of immediate outcomes and

enable him, at least in part, to control his motivation and thereby to

regulate his behavior. This self-regulation permits action that takes

account of a broader range of factors (the future, one’s partner, and so on)

and is therefore more effective. Our assumption in this chapter has been

that self-regulation is learned because of this very effectiveness.

Processes of

Attribution

and SelfPresentation

Showing and Inferring the Given Matrix, 213

The interpretation of Behavior, 214

Means-End Ambiguity of Choice, 215

Ambiguity of Valence, 216

The Interpretation of Behavior in Social Interaction, 217

Relative Contributions of the Interacting Members, 219

Presentation and Attribution of Value Transformations, 220

Self-Presentation in Interaction, 221

The Sequence and Timing of Choices, 224

Biases in the Attribution of Transformations, 226

Strategy or Social Motive? 228

Dynamic Sequences, 229

Development of the Relationship, 231

A Dilemma, 235

Escalation of Conflict, 237

nolisin 989

atiscs

oc)!

‘ Payre ania cad

Soe y

matin taf vi

hee 7 hy V

=. a

ABSTRACT

This chapter analyzes the processes by which the dyadic members learn the nature

of the given matrix and the transformations that are being applied to it. In

discussing these processes, account is taken of the cues presented by each member

and the resulting attributions made about the nature of the relationship. In a

concluding section the analysis is extended to show how self-presentational and

attributional processes operate in the development of trust and intimacy and in the

escalation of conflict.

Interdependent persons have strong interests in explaining one another’s

behavior. Each wants to know what the other person is really like in order

to know what can be expected of him in the future and under what

conditions his behavior will change. Predictability of the other person

matters because most important social interaction occurs in relationships

that extend into the future. Entering the relationship, committing oneself

to it, implies using up scarce resources (time and energy investments that

are irrecoverable), foregoing alternative relationships which then become

unavailable, and so on. At other transition points (e.g., during periods of

high conflict) the “terms” of the relationship may be questioned, and if

the relationship is to continue a renewed commitment must be made.

This commitment is made in the face of considerable uncertainty. The

future issues, problems, and course of any temporally extended relationship cannot be entirely predictable. Therefore to make a decision to

enter or continue the relationship the person must extract as much meaning as possible from the present behavior. This is equivalent to saying that

he must attempt to understand (a) the pattern of the given matrix for the

relationship and (b) the transformations that the other person is disposed

to make. He must learn to make valid attributions about his partner and

the relationship.

Interdependent persons also have strong interests in their respective

self-presentations. Each person finds it important to convey the reasons

for his own behavior clearly to his partner. In terms of the present

analysis, these reasons include both the person’s outcomes in the given

matrix and the transformations he is willing to make in the particular

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

relationship—his orientation to it; for example, expecting high rewards

from the interaction, the person will wish to indicate to his partner that he

values the early outcomes it yields. Similarly, valuing the relationship, he

will wish to show his own commitment in order to reassure his partner

and elicit a reciprocal commitment. With respect to transformations, the

person will try to show that he is a considerate and fair person, again to

reassure his prospective partner. In some instances, once sure of his

partner’s commitment,

the person may wish to establish his own

superiority in providing rewards in order to set the stage for gaining

advantages in the relationship (e.g., establishing high CL,), in bargaining).

Given the strong interests of interdependent persons in both attribution and self-presentation and, further, given that each person is usually

(from moment to moment) both a self-presenter and an attributer, it

seems probable that the same rules are used for both aspects of the

process. In other words, there is a “language” relating to action in

interdependent relationshps that is defined by a set of rules used for

encoding (self-presentation) and decoding (attribution). In this chapter

we discuss some of these rules and, in particular, how the interdependence and interaction context of an action determines what its actor

can hope to convey and what the partner is likely to make of it.

Although there may be a common language of self-presentation and

attribution, its use does not necessarily ensure agreement or common

understanding. From Jones and Nisbett (1971) it seems clear that an actor

and his observing partner may form quite different interpretations of the

actor’s behavior even though both may be applying the same coding rules

to the behavior. Information that is salient for the actor may not be salient

for the partner. In interpreting his own behavior, the actor tends to focus

his attention on features of the situation that elicited and constrained him

to a particular subset of responses. The observer, on the other hand,

tends to interpret the behavior as a manifestation

of stable dispositions—personality traits—of the actor.

Actors and observers are not only likely to find different kinds of

information most salient but, indeed, when they never exchange roles

(contrary to what we have assumed), they may apply quite different rules

to the processes of encoding and decoding. Thus observers may make

attributions that seriously misinterpret the meanings intended by the

actor’s self-presentations. Judges in relation to criminals, children in

relation to their parents, and the public in relation to movie stars, animals

in the zoo, and other ‘‘inmates’’—in none of these instances does the

observer have sufficent acquaintance with the actor’s role to ensure valid

attributions

about

the significance

intended by the actor’s

selfATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

presentation. Similar confusions are made by persons from different

cultures. Triandis, Vassiliou, and Nassiakou (1968) have investigated

some of these misunderstandings as they might arise between Americans

and Greeks. For one example a Greek who flatters, informs, or discusses

matters with another perceives that he is giving status to the other. * That is

the self-presentational meaning of his behavior. The receipt of this kind of

behavior is not interpreted by the American as status enhancing.

Thus, a Greek may expect appropriate behavior by the American in

exchange for the extra status the Greek has conferred on him. If the American fails to perceive the Greek’s behavior as giving status, the Greek is likely

to perceive him as ungrateful (p. 38).

Although a common language requires the use of the same rules for the

encoding and decoding communications about the relationship, a kind of

communication may occur that entails no deliberate encoding or selfpresentation. Unselfconsciously expressive or involuntary behavior may

provide cues (indicators, symptoms) that the actor never intended but

can be accurately decoded by the other person. This kind of behavior

includes paralanguage (voice qualities such as pitch and speech variations such as tempo and loudness), kinesics (body language), facial

expressions, and eye contact. (For an integrative summary of research on

these topics see Mehrabian, 1972.) These expressive, nonvoluntary communications may permit each participant to form reasonably good

attributions about properties and situational reactions of the other. On

the basis of this type of communication alone, however, the pair would

not be likely to reach

a common understanding, for neither member

would know what he had expressed to the other nor even know definitely

that he had expressed anything at all.

Although there are various verbal and paralinguistic modes of communication about the relevant facts of interdependence, the ultimate

* This may represent an ancient tradition among Greeks in interpreting presentations of

the self, as exemplified in Plato’s second letter to Dionysius, Tyrant of Syracuse: “Now as in

the beginning, you must show the way and I will follow your leading. If you show me marks

of esteem, I will repay them; if I receive no such marks, I shall keep my own counsel. Note,

too, that any marks of respect you show me, if you take the lead, will be evidence that you

think highly of philosophy, and the very fact that you have examined other teachers of

philosophy besides me will cause many to honor you as a true philosopher. On the other

hand, any marks of respect that I show you, unless you return them, will be interpreted as

evidence of my admiration of and desire for wealth—and such a name, we know, is

nowhere an honest one. To put it in a nutshell, if you do homage to me, we both rise in

men’s esteem; if I

do homage to you, we both sink. So much for this subject.” (Hamilton and

Cairns, 1969, p. 1565.)

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

channel of such communication

is behavior involved in the interdependence itself (be it verbal, gestural, or whatever). It is in what a

person does and does not do and in the consequences of those actions

(and actions foregone), both for the actor himself and for his partner, that

the final and crucial evidence is provided about his rewards and costs,

transformations, values, and intentions. Thus we have argued that the

interest

in attribution

and _ self-presentation

derives

from

interdependence that has certain properties (irreversibility, extensiveness,

unpredictability). Here, we argue that the processes of attribution and

self-presentation are, in the final analysis, based on interdependence,

that is, on behavior and its consequences. In brief, interdependence

provides both (a) the reasons for communication about person attributes

and (b) the ultimate means of such communication.

This chapter analyzes these processes. It also attempts to examine in

the same terms the presentation of self and the attribution of other. It is

assumed that the elements that are communicated are those pertaining to

interdependence and that the rules for manipulating these elements in

the service of self-presentation are the same as those rules used in processing these elements in making attributions. We discuss the processes

by which the given matrix comes to be known by the participants and then

turn to an analysis of how they learn about one another’s value transformations.

This sequence of topics may seem to imply that a person first infers the

partner’s given outcomes and then uses them as a basis for inferring the

partner’s transformations. Although that may be an optimal sequence of

events, the actual one may be quite different; for example, when assumptions about the partner’s transformations (those that might be based on

the role definition of the partner, as ‘‘mother’’, “enemy”, or “lover’’) form

the basis for inferring the partner’s given outcomes. Perhaps the most

typical case is that in which the two kinds of knowledge about the given

matrix and about the partner’s transformations are gained simultaneously. As noted in Chapter 1, the transformation process is the point

in the causal chain for social behavior at which the “person” appears,

both in fact and phenomenally, as a causal agent. The individual is aware

that his partner’s behavior reflects not only the necessities of his situation,

circumstances, biological need states, and abilities but also the more

personal and voluntary factors such as attitudes, social values, and intentions. It is this subjective understanding of the transformational link in

the causation of behavior that underlies the common attributional problem of accounting for the other’s behavior in terms of situational and

uncontrollable factors versus personal and volitional factors. The same

problem exists with respect to self-presentation (and associated selfATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

attribution, though we shall not consider this phenomenon). In the

solution of these problems there is rarely the clear information about one

class of causal factors, hence the relatively simple inferences possible

about the other factors, that our discussion may imply.

SHOWING AND INFERRING THE GIVEN MATRIX

It should be clear at this point in the book that accurate knowledge of the

pattern of outcomes in the given matrix is essential if the interdependent

members are to realize the full potentiality of their relationship. How is

this knowledge acquired?*

A first reaction to the question is to assert that a frank and open

discussion will lead to a correct joint appraisal. In brief, the discussion

might go like this: each will describe to the other the various behaviors in

his repertory and will indicate the hierarchy of his RC preferences; each

will explain his FC preferences among the alternatives that the other’s

repertory affords; and each will indicate his BC coordination preferences when outcome interferences and facilitations are experienced

or anticipated. In addition, information will be exchanged about expectations and what else each person might be doing (their CL’s and

Undoubtedly this process of open discussion will sometimes occur (ina

more relaxed and informal way than we have summarized) and will

sometimes lead to consensual understanding of the relationship. Still, by

itself this cannot be the general solution. For this open and honest

discussion to be appropriate outcomes in the relationship would have to

be highly correspondent. (In noncorrespondent patterns untrustworthy,

untrusting, deceptive, and evasive interactions would be more common.)

If this correspondence were already known to the pair, there must be

some basis other than open discussion for making this important attribution

about

pattern

of the given

matrix.

Furthermore,

discussion—whether honest or deceptive—is not always possible because of

the circumstances, common tasks, and necessity for action.

Hence our analysis of the process through which the given matrix is

jointly understood focuses on the production of behavior that is at least

partly nonverbal and on attributions made of that behavior. It has to

be confessed at the outset that little is known in detail about this

process.

* The given matrix may be imposed on the dyad by a third party (the experimenter or an

industrial supervisor) who explains in detail the behavioral alternatives, the outcomes, and

the patterning. We are not concerned here with external imposition.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The Interpretation of Behavior

The man in the street and the scientist share the same general approach to

the interpretation of behavior. Both assume that B =f

(P, E). Behavior isa

function of the person and of the environment. Thus behavior is assumed

to convey information about both P and E. Information about P (which is

usually, as here, the particular concern) is derived by viewing the

behavior in relation to the particular conditions under which it occurs

(which include its foreseen consequences). Lewin’s The Conceptual Representation and the Measurement of Psychological Forces (1938) is an analysis

of these interpretive rules as used in psychology. In what follows we

assume that essentially the same rules are used, although perhaps less

systematically, by common persons in their everyday affairs.

An observer of a person’s behavior can make judgments about several

different (though interrelated) aspects of its meaning: (a) the positive or

negative quality of the consequences of that behavior, (b) the specific

nature of the motivation that underlies it (the P factor because there is

always some kind of P involvement), and (c) the main type of cause(s)

involved in the behavior (the allocation between P and E, the stability of

the causal factors, and so on). Aspect (a) has been the domain of preference scaling based on the analysis of choice behavior; (b) is the

interpretive aspect emphasized by Jones and Davis (1965) in their theory

of correspondent inferences. The P-cause (intention) takes its name from

the consequences of the behavior. This identification of the motivation is

least ambiguous when the behavior reflects a choice among alternatives

and when the chosen action yields a single unique consequence (least

noncommon effects). Aspect (c) has been the focus of attribution theory

of the type developed by Kelley (1967), which considers the interpretive

implications of the distribution of the behavior over actors,

time,

situations, stimuli, and so on.

The information the observer has on which to base his interpretation of

behavior depends on the number of alternatives or conditions pertaining

to the behavior and their diversity. Just as the preference scaling will be

limited to the set of alternatives the actor considers so also are the causal

distinctions limited by the packages of consequences for the various

choices (in the Jones and Davis paradigm) and by the different conditions

over which the behavior is “distributed” (in the Kelley paradigm). Strictly

speaking, causes can be inferred only with respect to the set of consequences examined and the set of factors over which the distribution is

determined.

The observer, however, may not limit himself to the explicit comparisons available to him. He may also make mental comparisons. Thus

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

he may locate the actor’s preferences among a limited set of alternatives

on a broader scale by assuming that all the alternatives would be preferred to certain bad ones and that none would be preferred to certain

good ones. He may even imagine the preference before it is expressed; for

example, when he applies a simple causal schema (Kelley, 1972)—a

social-cultural stereotype—that causally links types of actor to particular

preferences. Similarly, he may take a given condition as being strongly

determinative of the behavior (even though the proper comparison,

involving the absence of that condition, has not been made) and make an

external attribution for the behavior. In these ‘‘mental experiments” the

person draws on his own experience as an actor and on his observations

of other actors.

Means-End Ambiguity of Choice

Simple choice behavior of the actor is ambiguous in regard to locus of

cause. To yield dependable interpretations it must be supplemented by

a (real or imagined) comparison of conditions. Consider the choice

behavior of a person who lives in a small town in which there are three

similar movie theaters, all under the same management. On a particular

evening the person is inspired to see a film. Although he makes a choice

among the three possible actions (he goes to one of the theaters), he has

no preferences among the actions per se but only about the films being

shown. The films, however, bear no necessary relation to the actions

themselves: the film he wanted most to see might have been shown at a

different theater. The means-ends relations were established more or less

arbitrarily by the manager of the theaters. In fact, the person’s choices

might be best described as preferences about the manager’s behavior.

There would be no essential change in the situation if the choice were

replaced by a request to the manager for a particular film.

Thus, when the relation between a person’s choice and his behavior

can be shifted arbitrarily (e.g., by the action of some external agent—a

theater manager), the choice reveals nothing about the actor’s evaluation

of his behavior per se and the observer can draw no conclusions about

causes for the behavior—that the behavior is in itself pleasing. The choice

reflects something extrinsic to the behavior. Only when the relation between choice and behavior is relatively invariant does choice reflect

causes intrinsic to the behavior.

The example of choice among movie theaters is useful in illustrating

some of the ways in which a person’s RC, FC, and BC can be distinguished by an observer. RC reflects the intrinsic consequences of a

person’s own behavior—the consequences for him that it dependably

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

yields without arbitrary external intervention. In the example presented

the person has no RC: in their intrinsic qualities one action is like another.

Evidence of RC would. require that the choice of theater be relatively

constant and independent of type of film (which would be true if one of

the theaters were discriminably closer to his home or had more comfortable seats).

To pursue the original example the manager’s decisions create BC. The

person’s preferred action will shift according to the ways in which the

manager distributes the films among the three theaters. This process,

however, really represents a conversion of managerial FC to BC: the more

basic fact is that the manager controls attractive objects that he can offer or

withhold from the person. Because these objects could potentially be

separated from the manager’s control (he could be replaced), an observer

is not likely to attribute the FC to intrinsic properties of the manager’s

behavior. Other types of reward (praise, affection) would not be so

separable. The separability of actions and consequences affords the

means by which attributers distinguish different kinds of reward: objectrewards have a transportable value as a currency that is relatively independent of the identity of the donor, whereas the very meaning of

affectional rewards is dependent on and closely associated with the

identity of the donor.

The example of the theaters also illustrates the problem of perceiving

concordance-discordance

in the given matrix,

hence outcome

correspondence. If it becomes profitable for the manager to place in his

theaters just the type of film that the person most prefers, then his RC is

concordantly related to the FC he exercises over the person and the given

matrix has high outcome correspondence. The person is not likely to

misperceive this harmony of interest, but again there may be ambiguity in

identifying its causal locus. The person may attribute the concordance to

his own good taste and economic power and those of his neighbors in

the community or he may locate the cause in dispositional properties of

the manager (as a value transformation).

Ambiguity of Valence

Simple choice behavior may also have some ambiguity regarding the

positive or negative valence of the consequences. The chosen action may

be more positive or less negative than the nonchosen one or both and the

observer may find it difficult to make the discrimination. The distinction,

however, can usually be made on the basis of response latencies.

Response to the more positive alternative is made with greater alacrity (an

approach response) than to the less negative alternative (an avoidance

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

component). Further cues are supplied by the conditions necessary to

induce the choice behavior. As Lewin showed, conditions of external

constraint—to prevent the chooser from “leaving the field’’—are necessary to induce a choice between two negative consequences. Emotional

behavior also offers cues for inferring the reward-cost level of the choice

alternatives—eager joyfulness accompanying the choice of the more positive alternative in contrast to the protesting and reluctant compliance in

choosing the less negative alternative.

The Interpretation of Behavior in Social Interaction

The special problems of inference that arise in ongoing social interaction

are now considered. So far, as in the extended example of the movie

theaters, an experimenter (the manager) has intervened to structure the

assessment of preferences in terms of controlled sets of choices confronting the person as actor. Without this intervention, as in everyday

social interaction, the attributional problem for an observer (the partner)

becomes more difficult. The comparison information that he would need

in order to make dependable inferences is not routinely available.

How does the observer, now as an interacting partner, obtain information about the elements of the given matrix—the actor’s RC, own FC

over him, and the BC contingencies? The actor’s RC is again most likely to

be manifested in choicelike behavior. In drawing inferences from these

choice behaviors, however, the observer-partner must somehow manage

to minimize his own possibly contaminating influence over them by

withdrawing from close interdependence (a “time out’’) during the

observational period. This lapsing of interdependence permits the actor

to exhibit his preferences spontaneously and to free the consequences

of his choice from interpretive confoundings. This source of confounding—between one person’s RC and the other’s FC as contributors

to outcome consequences—is discussed below in regard to perceptions of

relative control.

In assessing his FC effects on the actor, the observer-partner will rely

on expressive cues or, the relationship permitting, on choicelike requests

about what the observer-partner should do. Even when the observer has

no means of directly monitoring his effects on the actor, the observer has a

basis for understanding his FC by applying a simple covariation rule

(Kelley, 1971). This principle is illustrated in an experiment on MFC

(Kelley, Thibaut, Radloff, and Mundy, 1962).

In the experiment two subjects were placed before identical pieces of

apparatus that provided each of them with two responses—a left button

and a right button. On each successive presentation of a signal the

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

subjects simultaneously pressed one of the buttons. After each response

they received a gain or a loss. The response buttons of the two subjects

were wired so that each of the responses controlled the other’s gains and

losses. Thus each exercised total FC over the other. In the part of the

experiment of present concern the interdependence was fully explained,

except that subjects were not told which response had which effect on the

other’s outcomes. Subjects occupied separate cubicles and no explicit

communication was possible.

The attributional problem facing the subjects is a difficult one: how to

identify the response that helps the other so that an exchange of gains

might be effected? The experimental results suggest that subjects are able

to solve this problem: over the series of successive trials 26 of 34 pairs

attained a stable sequence of exchanging gains. Approximately 40% of

the subjects reported that they used a simple covariation rule to distinguish the effects of their responses: if one of their buttons was associated with trial-to-trial stability in their partner’s behavior, this meant that

button-press yielded him gains, but if the button was associated with

variability in the other’s behavior this meant that it gave him losses. (Note

that one subject’s use of the covariation rule affords the other subject an

opportunity to encode expressive behavior.) That applying and so interpreting the rule played an important part in solving the interdependence

problem is indicated by the fact that it was reported in more of the pairs

attaining a stable exchange of gains than in those failing to do so.

The diagnosis of own FC effects on the other by use of the covariation

rule requires the user to set aside his interest in gains and losses temporarily and to adopt an orientation aimed exclusively at acquiring information. Instead of responding to the other, he tentatively suspends the

interdependence by deciding unilaterally to press one of his buttons

repeatedly to gauge its effects on the temporal patterning of the other’s

responses. (This strategy seems similar to that of the observer-partner

who creates a lapse of interdependence in order to interpret the actor’s

RC.) It is plain that both persons cannot adopt this strategy effectively at

the same time: the programmed behavior of the attributor (who stabilizes

his behavior to test its effects) will develop valid information only if the

other responds “‘naturally’’ (attempts to maximize his gains). Simultaneous

of the attribution strategy—putting both on a selfprogrammed stability—would mislead both persons into believing that

they are pressing the correct button.

Making a clear attribution of RC and FC in the given matrix is probably

easier than making one of BC, for it would appear to be simpler to attain

the concept of main effects than that of conjunctivity or contingency.

Again, though, as in identifying FC, the observer-partner tests for BC by

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

assessing the consequences of his own behavior for the other person. The

attributor again takes the initiative, in this case by changing his behavior

(or by making a move), and then waits for the other to follow by matching

it. (This implies, of course, that there must be some means of monitoring

the other’s behavior.) The attributor’s action thus constitutes a signal that

invites coordination.

Relative Contributions of the Interacting Members

It will sometimes be difficult for the observer-partner to interpret the

relative causal contributions made by himself and the other to consequences they jointly produce. Who has the control, the causal responsibility, and in what degree? In a series of experiments Horvitz and Kelley

(unpublished) have investigated this question with respect to subjects’

assessments of own RC in relation to the other person’s FC over them. In

these experiments the subjects believed that they were interdependent

with another person in determining a numerical outcome. In fact, they

were interdependent with a ‘‘person”’ simulated by the computer. Each

person (real or simulated) had two alternative responses, each of which

generated a fixed numerical value. On successive trials, as the two persons responded independently, the subject’s outcome was always the

sum of the two values produced by himself and his partner. The difference between the values of the subject’s two responses (his RC) was

varied and, independently, the partner’s control (his FC) was similarly

varied. The question is the degree to which the subject forms an accurate

assessment of how much his own choices (his RC) affect his total outcome

score in relation to how much the partner’s choices (his FC) affect it.

Over the series of experiments the results are consistent in showing

that estimates of own control in relation to that of the partner are approximately accurate when own control is objectively equal to or greater than

the partner’s. When own control is less than the partner’s, however, own

control is overestimated. It is not clear just why this overestimation

occurred nor (the related puzzlement) to what classes of situation its

occurrence can be generalized. There is a hint in the data that suggests a

tentative interpretation of the effect. The data show that absolute judgments of own control vary directly with FC when RC is very small. This

can be taken to mean that, with small RC, the variation produced by the

partner is often mistakenly attributed to oneself. More generally, one may

notice some particular chance-produced subset of events that leads one to

experience a sense of control and then evaluate the degree of control

according to the magnitude of variation in the outcome.

Another kind of error in estimation concerns judgments of CL,),. EviINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

dence of this bias comes from experimental studies of bargaining in which

each of the two bargainers knows the level of outcome he mustattain if he

is to realize any profit. Neither knows the value specified for the other.

This assigned value (the break-off value or CL,),) constitutes the main

external cause for each bargainer’s behavior—how resistive or accommodative he will be. In two experiments, when subjects were asked at the

end of the bargaining session to estimate their opponent’s value (his

CL,,,), they consistently underestimated it (Pruitt and Drews, 1969; Kelley,

Shure, et al., 1970). Similar results were obtained by Shure and Meeker

(1969) for a game involving the division of a set of territories. The conclusion to be drawn from these three studies is that the causal contribution of an externally imposed factor (the opponent's CL,),) as a source

of experienced conflict is systematically underestimated. From these

studies alone it is not possible to assert that the opponent’s personal

contribution to the conflict (by his intractable behavior) is overestimated,

although this may appear to be a plausible inference. The attribution of

such dispositional properties to the other person as proximal cause for his

behavior is the topic of the next section on the perception of value

transformations.

PRESENTATION AND ATTRIBUTION OF

VALUE TRANSFORMATIONS

Often an observer-partner can assume that the actor in a social

relationship has knowledge of the pattern of outcomes in the given matrix—of

his own preferences, of his partner’s preferences, and the degree of

correspondence between the two sets of preferences. When, in addition,

the observer-partner has similar knowledge (it need not be the same, but

he must assume it to be), he is able to discern how the actor’s choices

relate to the given matrix.

As we noted in the preceding section, the distinctions the observerpartner can make are limited by the set of choices available to the actor. As

McClintock and Messick (McClintock, 1972a; Messick and McClintock,

1968) have shown, there are enough different plausible social motives

that a choice between two simple alternatives, each with consequences

for both self and partner, is likely to be ambiguous in its interpretations.

These authors have worked out the logic of distinguishing among three of

the motives that we have discussed as representing important outcome

transformations by means of choices among alternatives (Figure 8.1).

They point out that by increasing the number of alternatives (as in the

third set of choices in the figure) evidence can be provided separately for

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

Person A

Figure 8.1

Some sets of alternative actions for person B differing in their attributional

implications.

each of the three social motives (which are always confounded in such

two-alternative choices as those to the left): maximizing own (illustrated

by the C choice), maximizing the relative gain (illustrated by D), and

maximizing joint gain (illustrated by E).

McClintock and his colleagues have developed these choices as means

of assessing subjects’ orientations to experimental games. These investigators themselves, the attributers in this case, use the chosen options

and their consequences to infer the typical reasons behind a subject’s

behavior. For our purpose the assessment rules McClintock and his

group have developed are important in that they suggest the rules that

people in general use in showing and inferring their orientations in

various social relationships. Although it remains to be shown, there is

little doubt that the man in the street uses much the same information and

interpretive principles here as the psychologists do.

Self-Presentation in Interaction

Messick and McClintock demonstrate that, with the proper comparisons,

experimenters can decode social motives (outcome transformations). We

now turn to evidence of whether and how outcome transformations can

be presented by partners in social interaction. Subjects can report their

conscious motives for making particular choices in interaction with

others. McClintock (1972a) asked subjects to set down verbal reports of

their reasons for their choices during the course of playing the MDG. The

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

following categories summarize the principal reasons given for their

choices:

To try to get as many points as possible for myself.

To keep the lead.

To catch up with the other player.

To help the other player get more points.

To get as many points as possible for both of us.

To get the other player to play differently.

To try something new.

To learn something about the game or the other player.

For no precise reason.

For another reason (explanation given).

In a later study based on this list McClintock asked subjects in Belgium

and the United States to indicate on each of 100 trials which cell in the

MDG matrix they preferred and for which of the 10 reasons. Across the

Belgian and American samples 85% of the reasons given for preferring a

cell fell in the first five categories—those most indicative of the major

outcome transformations as defined here.

Although it is plain that interactors can report their motives for choices

(at least in the MDG), some patterns in the given matrix may be better

vehicles than others for the expression or presentation of personal dispositions. In a questionnaire study (Kelley, Jaffe, and Oliver, unpublished) subjects were asked to show how they would express various

traits in moves they would make ina

set of matrix patterns. The four traits

they were asked to exemplify were fair-just, considerate-altruistic,

achieving-competitive, and brave-courageous. The patterns in which

they were asked to demonstrate each of the traits were perfectly correspondent MBC, PDG, Chicken, and perfectly noncorrespondent MBC.

Subjects found correspondent MBC to be the least useful of the four

patterns for expressive purposes: it provides fewer ways than the others

of distinctively presenting the traits. For example, the consideratealtruistic trait is generally expressed by taking negative outcomes while

giving the partner a positive one. This is not possible in the correspondent

pattern, and the encoding of this trait gets maximally confused with the

others. In the three other patterns the considerate-altruistic trait is one of

those most clearly differentiated from the rest. Similarly, the achievingcompetitive trait (expressed by taking a positive outcome while giving the

partner a negative one) is well differentiated from the other traits in all of

the patterns except correspondent MBC. Achieving-competitive is most

differentiated from its closest neighbor (brave-courageous) in the nonATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

correspondent MBC pattern, apparently because of a clear separation

between the choice that yields self a negative outcome (for bravery) and

the choice that yields self an advantage (for competitiveness).

At least for 2 x 2 matrices, most patterns are probably constraining with

respect to (a) the single dispositions that are difficult to encode and (b) the

particular pairs of dispositions that are easily confused. One criterion for

“optimality’”’ of pattern would be the degree to which the pattern permits

the clear expression of traits; for example, the optimal form of Chicken

would presumably permit the clearest display of courage (see Chapter 5

and next section). PDG is a relatively poor vehicle for self-expression,

considering the ambiguity of its moves (a point that we discuss further).

Still, although its language is ambiguous, it is superior to correspondent

MBC which provides hardly any language at all.

The research of Kelley and his colleagues shows that patterns differ in

the ease and precision with which they may be employed to reveal

dispositions. It is also possible, although Kelley’s research cannot help

with this question, that some dispositions are more difficult to encode

than others—that there is less of a language available to express them or

to express them in a way that distinguishes them clearly from other

dispositions. In any case, once motivational dispositions are encoded it is

important to know whether there are differences among them in the ease

with which they can be decoded. This is one of the questions addressed

by the research of Thorngate (undated).

In his experiment Thorngate asked subjects to predict the choices of a

target person (the ‘‘chooser’’) who was programmed to make Pruittdecomposed choices expressing one of seven different orientations. The

orientations of choosers remained constant throughout the experiment

and ranged from one that was highly competitive (reflecting a goal of

maximizing relative gain) to one that was consistently altruistic (reflecting

a goal of maximizing other’s gain). On each trial subjects were shown the

decomposed choice-alternatives. During the first 10 trials, however, they

received no feedback about the chooser’s actual choices; hence predictions during these trials were merely guesses that can be taken to

reveal expectations about the most likely or most plausible behavior of a

chooser. These results show that subjects make fewest errors predicting

the choice behavior of the perfectly individualistic orientation (goal: to

maximize own gain). A priori, then, subjects found the individualistic

orientation most plausible. Other orientations, as they diverged in either

direction (toward competition or toward altruism), were progressively

less easily inferred. During the last 30 trials subjects were given feedback

after each trial about the correctness of their predictions of the choices

made by the chooser. The subjects generally showed improvement in

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

their ability to predict the chooser’s behavior. There were striking differences, however, depending on the chooser’s orientation, in the level of

accuracy attained. When the orientation of the chooser was any of those

ranging from individualistic to competitive—when the chooser weighted

his own interest above that of the other—subjects learned to predict the

behavior almost perfectly; but, when the chooser’s orientation was any of

those ranging from cooperative to altruistic—when he weighted the

other’s interest at least as heavily as his own—subjects were significantly

less able to make accurate predictions.

In commenting on the implications of his research, Thorngate observes

that his subjects were adept at learning to discern the motivational orientation underlying the chooser’s behavior and that this high level of

accuracy leaves unanswered the question why, in real life, certain decision-maker motives seem to be widely misperceived. As one possible

answer he speculated that misinformation about the given situation may

be responsible for these errors.

Political leaders, for example, may purposely withhold information about

the personal outcomes accruing from their decisions and/or emphasize only

the benefits which accrue to others in hopes of demonstrating that these

decisions resulted in maximizing the other’s gain and hence that they are

truly beneficent.

This underlines our point, made earlier, that valid inferences about value

transformations are promoted by a more or less accurate understanding

of the given matrix. Otherwise it is difficult to decide whether a given

behavior represents a response to the given matrix or is causally grounded

in personal dispositions.

The Sequence and Timing of Choices

As shown in Chapter 6, certain social values can be satisfied only by

particular sequential patterns of choice. This is especially true for certain

patterns of interdependence, namely those having an important component of MBC; for example, in the turn-taking game (Figure 4.8) turn

taking by the pair will maximize the joint outcomes and minimize

difference between the individuals’ respective outcomes. One person’s

alternating pattern of choices would afford a basis for inferring that he

holds the social values corresponding to these two criteria. Here, as in

general, the inference depends on the distribution of consequences. In

certain cases, for example, those requiring 4:1 alternation for equal outcomes, an alternating pattern might indicate only a weak interest in

equitable sharing of outcomes.

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

Going first in a preemption game and thereby changing the partner’s

choice alternatives can also form the basis for inferences about value

transformations. The game of Chicken (discussed on p. 134) is particularly interesting in the present connection because the testing of the

observer-partner is an explicit and necessary part of the actor’s selfpresentational strategy. We can assume that to provide a setting for the

display of courage the game must involve one option that is safe and

another that is risky. This is shown for the actor A in Figure 8.2 in which

his choice of C yields a medium outcome no matter what B (the observerpartner) does, but the D choice yields a high or low outcome, depending

on whatB does. By making the D choice A puts his fate in B’s hands; thus

the choice of D is evidence of willingness to take a risk. The D choice,

however, can indicate this willingness only if there is no other basis for its

choice. This requires that the high and low outcomes be equally likely;

therefore there can be no expectation of a higher or lower outcome on the

average for the D choice than for the C choice. The latter requires that,

when

A chooses D and confronts B with that choice, A must be maximally

uncertain about what B will then do. The preemptive choice of D is

evidence of stupidity if the other person is certain to reciprocate with D

and evidence of an inane exhibitionism if he is sure to reciprocate with C.

To present self as willing to face risky uncertainty the preemptive choice

must put the partner in a situation in which his choice is a close one. In

other words, A’s presentation of his courage requires the creation of a

special set of causal conditions for the partner’s subsequent behavior,

conditions that place that partner in maximum conflict.

Actor A

Observer—

partner

Figure 8.2.

The game of Chicken.

Attributions of value transformations may also depend on the context

provided by the other person’s concurrent behavior. Kelley and Stahelski

(1970a) show that an actor’s intentions (the goal he has set for himself) in

the PDG is inferred not only on the basis of his own successive actions but

on the actions of his partner in the meantime. Thus an actor who shifts

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

from C to D on successive occasions is judged more competitive if his

partner’s first response is cooperative than if itis competitive. In the MDG

the partner’s move makes little difference in the interpretation of the C to

D shift, and (consistent with the McClintock and Messick analysis) the

rate of a competitive attribution for this shift is rather high (Kelley,

unpublished data). However, there are probably some rules common to

all patterns with a degree of outcome noncorrespondence. In both the

PDG and the MDG the shift from D to C that consists of “giving up an

advantage” is judged to be more cooperative than the similar shift not

subject to that interpretation (unpublished data; only weakly true in the

Kelley and Stahelski data). Similarly, in both Hero and Battle of the Sexes,

which require turn taking for equal outcomes, the move that consists of

“offering” to give the partner a turn after having had one is seen as more

cooperative than the move interpretable as “asking” for one’s turn after

the partner has had his.

Biases in the Attribution of Transformations

An unpublished study by Kelley and Patterson suggests that even in

close, romantic relationships there may be a tendency to perceive oneself

as making a max joint transformation to a greater degree than the partner

does. Members of young heterosexual dating couples rated their satisfaction-dissatisfaction with common events in their relationship. For the

example shown in Figure 8.3:

You and your partner want to see different movies. Rate your satisfaction

for the four cases in which (a) you go together to the movie you prefer, (b)

you go to your preferred movie and your partner goes to his/hers, (c) you go

together to the movie your partner prefers, and (d) you go to the movie your

partner prefers and he/she goes to the one you prefer.

Ratings were made on a —10 to +10 scale for both self and partner, the

latter affording evidence of how the partner is perceived to react to the

four situations. It is not surprising that the pattern of results (Figure 8.3)

shows a large correspondent MBC component: the person has a strong

interest in going with the partner, regardless of the movie, and attributes

the same interest to the partner (shown by the estimates of the partner’s

ratings in parentheses). Moreover, the person reports somewhat more

satisfaction if the jointly selected movie is the one preferred by the partner

rather than the one preferred by the self. This evidence that the person’s

satisfaction depends in part on the partner’s does not find its parallel in

the outcomes imputed to the partner. The partner is seen to derive more

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

Self (A)

A's

B's

preferred

preferred

movie

movie

A's

preferred

movie

Partner (B)

B's

preferred

movie

Figure 8.3

Own outcomes and estimates of partner’s outcomes (in parentheses) for

choice of movies.

satisfaction from the joint attendance at his/her preferred movie than

from going together to the movie preferred by the self. In other words, the

typical subject sees himself/herself as giving more weight to the partner’s

outcomes than the partner gives to the subject’s outcomes. This result

was replicated for five other interdependence situations similar to that in

Figure 8.3. It was also apparent in a direct rating procedure in which the

person rated the overall desirability of various combinations of own and

partner’s ‘“outcomes’” and made estimates of the desirability for the

partner of the same combinations. Own sense of desirability reflected toa

greater degree the partner’s “outcomes” (relative to own ‘‘outcomes”)

than was perceived to be true for the partner’s experience of desirability.

A rather similar result has recently been obtained by Michael Ross

(personal communication). When members of couples are asked to estimate their percent contributions to various activities (What percent of the

breakfasts do you prepare? What percent of the waiting do you do?), the

two estimates consistently add up to more than 100%. In other words,

one or both persons overestimate the contributions the self makes to the

welfare of the couple. Although this result is subject to a variety of

interpretations, Ross suggests the plausible idea that it may reflect differential availability in memory of relevant events (Iversky and Kahneman,

1973). When the person makes a judgment of own versus partner’s

contributions, instances of the former come more readily to mind. A

similar interpretation may be made of the Kelley and Patterson results.

Each person may generally be more aware of instances in which he/she

does things out of consideration of the partner’s preference than of

instances in which the partner reciprocates. The counter self-interest

(discordant RC) makes such actions salient to the actor, but a desire to

reflect a genuine considerateness in the action inhibits explicit expression

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

of the overridden self-interest. (Such expression would threaten to define

the action as an instrumental move to elicit a reciprocation of the benefit.)

Thus the considerate act may often be salient for the self but go unnoticed

by the partner.

Strategy or Social Motive?

McClintock (1972a) has observed that subjects’ choices in mixed-motive

games may have proximal (immediate) or distal (ulterior) goals and that

the ambiguities involved in deciding which goal is being pursued pose a

major interpretive problem for the scientist. It is not only for the scientist

that this constitutes a problem but also undoubtedly for the naive participant, the observer—partner.

As noted in Chapter 7, McClintock draws the distinction between

choices that represent a simple and direct expression of a motive or goal

and those that are an indirect expression of a goal. The latter are instrumental or strategic acts; for example, “’. .

. a strategy devised to convince

the other player to make choices which will permit you to realize your

goal of maximizing own gain” (p. 281). Thus an observer may be deceived

into believing that an actor’s move reflects a motive of genuinely friendly

cooperativeness when in fact it represents a manipulation strategy

designed to further his own ulterior interests. The research and theory of

Jones (Jones, 1964; Jones and Wortman, 1973) document the use of this

kind of strategy by the ingratiator who attempts to protect his long-time

interests by disarming interdependent others.

It will be noticed that McClintock’s distinction between social motive

and strategy is analogous to the one we have made between two kinds of

transformation (cf. Chapter 6): mathematical operations performed on

the given matrix values (outcome transformations) and sequential rules

(or sequential transformations). The success of an instrumental strategy,

for example, one of ingratiation, can be said to depend on confusing one

type of transformation with another. Specifically, the strategy depends

on mistakenly identifying a sequential transformation as being a transformation of the outcome values. In McClintock’s analysis (and also in

Jones’s) the sequential transformation is typically in the service of an

“antisocial’’ motive—self-aggrandizement, exploitation—whereas the

outcome transformation simulates

a ‘‘prosocial’’ intention—a compliment ora

gulling gambit of cooperation. More generally, though, there

is no reason why strategies (sequential transformations) cannot be guided

by motives that are fully as prosocial as those that guide some (but not all)

outcome transformations. As we have seen, in some patterns of interdependence involving MBC prosocial values can be realized only by

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

sequential rules. Nevertheless, it probably remains true that many attributional errors are made when strategies are used in a deceptive way for

manipulative ends.

The basic problems of self-presentation and attribution appear to be

whether to show one’s motives openly and honestly regardless of their

“prosocial” or ‘antisocial’ character and whether to be suspicious in

interpreting what the other has shown. These questions seem to resolve

into the larger contextual question of where the interest of the interdependent parties lies. In the next section we try to demonstrate that an

answer to this larger question requires an analysis of the degree of

outcome correspondence and the stability (or transiency) of the relationship.

DYNAMIC SEQUENCES

We are concerned in this section with self-presentational and attributional processes that accompany the developments or evolutions by

which relationships take form and proceed toward stability or, on the

other hand, experience increasing conflict that leads to mutually destructive behavior and/or termination of the relationship.

In these

dynamic sequences the display and correct reading of goals and intentions becomes important not only as a symptom of whether the relationship is moving toward stability or disruption but also as a causal input

that accelerates or decelerates the movement. We begin the analysis by

considering the tension that exists between mutual and unilateral interest

as criteria for action in the relationship.

In Chapter 7 we showed that interdependence patterns provide settings in which both prosocial and egoistic transformations may reward

the individual. The consequences for a person of any particular transformation depend on both the pattern of interdependence and the transformations the partner is making or is disposed to make. It is plain, then,

that before embarking ona

line of action it behooves each member to attain

a correct understanding of the degree of correspondence in the given

matrix. If outcomes are objectively congruent, then the member can make

the prosocial overture—show the value he places on cooperation—with

some confidence that his partner will reciprocate. On the other hand, if

the pattern of the given matrix is highly noncorrespondent, each

member’s unilateral interest, prescribing an antisocial transformation,

dominates his decision. If the member incorrectly interprets the given

matrix as correspondent and accordingly makes a prosocial overture, he

will be vulnerable to the other member’s self-interested action. However,

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

it is maximally to the member’s advantage—when he is confident that the

pattern is noncorrespondent—to conceal his intention to move competitively and to encourage the other member to interpret the situation as

being truly harmonious.

What is prescribed in the foregoing paragraph for relationships that are

grounded in an objective conflict of interest holds clearly only for transient encounters or for relationships in which the worst action available is

not seriously damaging. The competitive action of one member may lead

to attempts at retaliation by the others but no serious escalation of conflict

can develop—the encounter is terminated or the retaliation is as harmless

as the competitive provocation. But when the objectively conflicted relationship has a long future and one from which there is no exit, as in a

marriage whose partners have very poor CL,),, or two powerful nations

on a small planet,

a common interest may develop in controlling the

(possibly) mutually destructive escalation of conflict. This common interest is an objective one; it has definite consequences and it modifies the

given matrix by adding an element of outcome correspondence. Adding

this degree of harmony of interest to the motivational mix makes it

adaptive for both members

to take accurate account of the noncorrespondence in the given matrix (and to show one another that accurate account has been taken). Unless both members have an accurate

understanding of the degree of real disharmony of interest, one of them

may start an escalation of the conflict by underestimating its true degree

(and thus irresistibly inviting the other’s escalating move) or overestimating it (and making the move himself) by failing to perceive the

element of common interest.

When the relationship involves both common interest and conflict of

interest (the mixed-motive game, intermediate between correspondence

and noncorrespondence), then problems of presenting and inferring one

another’s transformational tendencies become severe. As we noted in

Chapter 7, these relationships create a tension between prosocial and

egoistic or antisocial transformations. As shown in Figure 8.4, there is a

mutual interest in moving from the latter types of transformation in the

lower portion of the figure to the prosocial transformations exemplified

by the max other and max joint outcome transormations. On the other

hand, if one person is operating at one of the higher levels, his partner

often finds aunilateral advantage, at least in the short run, in adopting one

of the more egoistic criteria for action.

The processes shown in Figure 8.4 may be taken to represent, by the

upward pointing arrow on the right, the formation and development of

the relationship through the building of mutual trust and, by the downward arrows on the left, the escalation of conflict. These two processes

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

Max other

Max joint

Unilateral

Macon

Mutual

interest

interest

Max relative

gain

Figure 8.4

The tension between mutual and unilateral interest in various criteria for

action.

depend critically on the self-presentations and attributions that are

made in the relationship. We will analyze the two processes separately.

Development of the Relationship

The formation process is characterized by a series of decisions by each

individual, decisions that are usually, though not always, quite implicit

and unselfconscious. At each decision point the individual elects whether

to “move further into” the relationship (and how much, at what rate) or to

drop out of it. The former involves “giving more” to the relationship and

becoming more dependent on the partner’s reciprocated benefits. The

latter alternative includes physically remaining in interaction but doing so

on false terms—appearing to make a further commitment but with no

personal intention to fulfill the contractual terms being implicitly evolved.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Because trust-inducing initiatives may be ambiguous when action is

taken simultaneously (Swinth, 1967), we present the process as a series of

steps involving alternating moves and countermoves.

Step 1. The individual's decision to move further into the relationship is

made on the basis of some increase in certainty that (a) the relationship

will be rewarding (and low in cost) and (b) he will not be exploited or

abruptly abandoned. Increased certainty about the reward qualities and

dependability of the other rests on attributions concerning more or less

stable dispositions of the other. Has he the ability to produce the kinds of

outcome that are rewarding to self? From Jones and Goethals (1971) it

seems clear that abilities are perceived to be stable over time and that early

samples of high-level performance create strong primacy effects that

cause the observer to expect future performances to be equally impressive. Hence this research suggests that early samples containing highly

valid indicators of talent, especially when direct, unmediated, observation of the other’s products is possible (Thibaut and Ross, 1969), should

heighten the certainty that early rewards are not accidental or transient.

By the same token early samples of inferior performance relevant to the

production of rewarding outcomes should lead to decisions to break off

the relationship.

Heightened assurance of not being exploited or abandoned is based on

cues that the other person can be depended on, trusted to reciprocate

appropriately, and to respond in the same terms as are implied by one’s

own actions. This impression of the other’s dependability derives from

assessments that (a) he is dependent on the relationship, (b) his interests

and your own overlap in a sufficient degree of common interest, and (c)

he intends to act out of consideration of your and the common interest,

that is, to make a prosocial transformation of the matrix. Workers under

the same supervisor exemplify the kind of situation in which cues of this

sort abound. The workers are related to one another in a more or less

stable “balance” of power and they share large areas of common interest.

Their intentions toward one another may be regarded as honest and are

supported by commitments to widely shared norms.

Step 2. The decision to ‘move further into” the relationship was based

on some assurance that the relationship would be both rewarding and

dependable. At the same time the decision entails actions or moves

designed to increase the other person’s certainty in the same two respects

and thereby to induce a reciprocal “confirming” or “‘validating’” move

from him. (To say that the decision was so designed does not mean that it

may not be motivated and interpreted differently, especially if the move is

very large and very fast—‘“‘coming on too strong.” This consideration is

dealt with later.) Thus the latent ‘“message’”’ to the other person is (a) the

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

relationship with me will be rewarding for you and low in cost; and (b) I

am dependable and intend to fulfill the terms implied by my behavior.

[As above, this implication of dependability may include suggestions that

(a) I too am dependent on the relationship, (b) our interests are convergent, hence I will not be tempted to harm you, and (c) lam committed

to following the same rules and norms that you are. |

Making the initiating move that reassures the other party and invites

his confirming countermove is part of Osgood’s (1962) proposal for

“graduated reciprocation in tension reduction.”” A simplified version has

been tested in the laboratory by Pilisuk and Skolnick (1968). Subjects

played an extended form of the PDG with a scenario that employed the

language of international tension; for example, armament, disarmament,

mutual inspection. Some of the subjects were paired with programmed

opponents who played a matching (tit-for-tat) or a conciliatory strategy

that prescribed a play on trialn + 1 that was one degree (one “‘missile”’)

less aggressive (or more friendly) than that of the subject on trial. Thus

both programmed strategies were matching strategies but the conciliatory strategy also contained

a unilateral

initiative toward disarmament. An additional sample of paired subjects played ‘‘naturally,”

that is, without any programmed intervention. Cross cutting the foregoing treatments was an inspection variation that permitted half the pairs

a display of intentions (the programmed ‘‘opponents” were always honest) about subsequent moves. The results suggest that the Osgood proposal for integrating small, consistent, unilateral initiatives of friendliness

with an honest prior declaration of intentions does produce significantly

more cooperation than is found in natural pairs but only marginally more

cooperation than is generated by the comparable matching strategy. The

evidence in this study for the trust-enhancing contribution of the initiating move is thus only suggestive. (The authors indicate a possible artifact

produced by the values in the payoff matrix that might, under the conciliatory strategy, have put a ceiling on further cooperation.) In any case,

there is further evidence of the importance of the initiating move.

We might ask about some of the specific cues that could lead the other

person to interpret one’s initiating move as implying dependability.

These cues would seem to include any evidence that the move has

involved some cost, that it has been made in the face of risks or other

obstacles. [Swinth (1967) shows that accepting risks and incurring costs

(foregoing gains) act in the same way to develop trust. ]

If one’s initiating

move is perceived to entail some sacrifice of one’s own interests, the other

person will be more likely to attribute it toa dependable source, hence to

make a validating reciprocation. Pruitt’s (1968) research suggests that this

is so. Subjects receiving a standard reward reciprocated more generously

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the smaller the resources they imputed to the person rewarding them.

Step 3. The decision to move further into the relationship serves not

only to reassure the other person that the relationship will be rewarding

and dependable; it also tends to be committing in several ways. First, the

move constitutes a tacit agreement to continue and to enlarge the relationship, at least in a further exploratory way. Moreover, if the move is

public, if it is visible or otherwise communicated to relevant other persons—to the ‘‘field of eligibles” (Winch, 1952)—it tends to cause alternative partners to back away and to withdraw any aspirations they might

have to form a relationship with either of the dyadic members. This

receding of the alternatives has the effect of heightening the costs to the

dyadic members of breaking off their interaction. (These comments, of

course, apply only to relationships that are mutually exclusive or incompatible with the developing one, this being the conceptual meaning of

alternative.) Again, if the move has been public, it may stimulate the

surrounding social system to take part in enforcing the continued solidarity of the dyad. This will be true when explicit social rituals—initiation

or induction ceremonies—confirm the formation and adjure the preservation of a relationship.

Step 4. The process so far has entailed (in Step 1) the individual's

decision to move further in the relationship, based on some increased

certainty that it will be rewarding and dependable, and (in Step 2)

actions designed to increase the other person’s certainty that it will be

rewarding and dependable for him. Such actions or moves tend (in Step

3) to commit the actor to the relationship. Now (in Step 4), if the “move

further’ has been successful in transmitting the promise of a rewarding

and dependable relationship, it reduces the other person’s uncertainty in

this regard and creates the conditions that encourage him to make the

next move. Thus, in general, the formation process can be considered as

an exchange of actions or messages that reduce uncertainty or increase

the mutual assurance that the relationship will endure and be worth

enduring.

As the mutual assurance steadily increases during the early formative

period, each member may perceive that he is being evaluated by the other

in an increasingly positive way. Each person may thus experience the

ascending sequence of evaluations studied in the experiment by Aronson

and Linder (1965) in which female subjects overheard evaluations being

made of them at repeated intervals by another girl (an experimental

confederate). Because the subjects were led to believe that the confederate was unaware that she was being overheard, the subjects could

not attribute the evaluations to any attempt to flatter or openly insult

them. During each of the intervals between the evaluations the subject

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

was required by the ostensible purpose of the experiment to talk with the

confederate fora few minutes. Under the various experimental conditions

the overheard evaluations gradually improved from initially negative to

finally positive, deteriorated from initially positive to finally negative, or

were steadily positive or steadily negative. Postexperimental assessments

of the evaluator revealed that she was liked best in the first condition

when her evaluations gradually changed from negative to positive.

Research on bargaining and gaming has shown some parallel effects in

comparing the consequences of different schedules of concessions or

cooperative-competitive play. Benton, Kelley, and Liebling (1972) report

that a bargaining opponent who commences with extreme demands and

gradually moves to more moderate ones is evaluated as having been fairer

than one who begins with moderate demands and persists with them

throughout. Moreover, with the former opponent the subject feels

greater responsibility for the outcome, greater success in influencing

the partner, and greater satisfaction with the negotiation. In reviewing

research on programmed strategies in the PDG, Oskamp (1971) summarizes the consistent findings that a shift from a low to a high rate of

cooperation is more effective in inducing subjects to cooperate than a

consistently high rate of cooperation. Although the temptation to exploit

the sucker (the consistent cooperator) may account for these PDG results,

a more general interpretation would seem to be required to account for

the more favorable effect found for all of the foregoing ascending

schedules: increasingly cooperative PDG programs, extreme to moderate

bargaining demands, and negative to positive evaluations in the Aronson

and Linder experiment. The plausible possibility is that the subject may

experience the security that derives from a sense of control and mastery

over his social environment, attributing to himself the causality for the

positive trends in the other person’s behavior.

A Dilemma

In taking an action to reassure the other person that the relationship will

be both rewarding and dependable (Step 2), the individual faces a

dilemma. On the one hand, the move further is not meaningful to the other

person if it consists only of what has already been thoroughly justified by

the other’s prior action. It is necessary, if the other person is to be induced

to make his move further (Step 4), that one’s own action constitute an

initiative, an indication of one’s personal intention to move further, and

not simply what is demanded by the other’s earlier contributions. To

ensure Step 4, one’s move must embody more than simply matching or

catching up with what the other’s actions have already justified.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

The foregoing observations imply that the process proceeds by risk

taking and, if both persons are to experience a reduction of uncertainty,

ideally both would take risks. (If, however, one person is more secure in

his interpersonal relationships than the other, he may have to take the

lead in the risk taking and perhaps receive assurance by the other’s

following; but even this process can constitute symmetrical risk taking.

The insecure partner communicates his anxiety and, given that context,

even his lower-level increases in commitment are seen and felt as risk

taking.)

We have said that one must make a move that is not perceives’ io be

simply the effect caused by the other person’s prior actions. On the other

hand,

if in making the move further (in Step 2) the components of the

message are emphasized too strongly (capabilities to produce rewards,

dependence, and dependability) then the reassurance gained from the

other person’s subsequent move (in Step 4) is endangered. The sheer size

of own move may then suggest his motivation for remaining in the

relationship: he only wants to get the reward or to exploit trust and

dependence. Another possible consequence of making a move of too

great a magnitude is that too large a move, ‘coming on too strong,’’ may

be interpreted by the other as an aggressively dependent overture: he is

being overwhelmed with rewards for which he will be asked a costly

repayment in the future. That persons are wary of and resist this possibility of future exploitation is suggested by an experiment by Brehm and

Cole (1966). When the situation is perceived to be important, subjects

who were unexpectedly given a soft drink by a confederate helped the

confederate less in a subsequent activity (stacking papers) than subjects

who had not been given the soft drink.

Similarly, Schopler and

Thompson (1968) have demonstrated that when the setting is “formal”

(but not when it is informal’) the receipt of a favor (a flower) leads to

less willingness subsequently to help the confederate (by assenting to

wash blouses) than when no favor was done. Schopler and Thompson

interpret their results in terms of the attributions made of the donor’s

motives: that he is preoccupied with the recipient in the informal condition and with his own requirements in the formal one.

The dilemma then is how to make a move meaningfully greater than

the other’s prior moves have warranted (to constitute a reassurance to

him) but not so great as to put in question to you his subsequent move or

to put in question to him your intentions.

This process of developing trust, as we have just described it, takes

place in the early stages of relationships when dangers and uncertainties

abound. If the initial contacts indicate to either of the potential partners

that the given matrix is too extremely noncorrespondent, then there is too

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

little basis for the development of trust or for the adoption of prosocial

transformations (see Chapter 7). On the other hand, if the matrix is

extremely correspondent, there is also no basis for the development of

trust, for there is nothing to risk, hence no test of willingness to take risks:

cooperative overtures will be attributed to the structure of the situation

rather than to dispositional (or pattern-transforming) properties of the

participants. Therefore it is in the middle regions of the continuum of

outcome correspondence, in which elements of both conflict and cooperation are present as temptations, that attributions of trust have

their origins. Here, also, conflict can escalate.

Escalation of Conflict

The process by which conflict develops is in many ways the simple

reverse of the process of trust building. Competitive and destructive

behaviors replace the cooperative and constructive as the directions taken

in the processes summarized in Figure 8.4; but there is more to it than

that. A crucial difference between the two processes is that whereas the

upward movements of trust development in Figure 8.4 require a mutual

assent—a conjunctive responsibility—the downward movements of conflict development can be started and maintained by unilateral action.

This process has been analyzed by Kelley and Stahelski (1970b). After

subjects had been instructed in the PDG, they were asked to decide what

their goal would be in playing the game with another person, whether

they wanted to establish a cooperative relationship with him or intended

to play competitively. This decision about intentions reflects roughly the

dispositional properties of the subjects. In pairs of subjects with different

goals, one having selected the cooperative goal and the other, the competitive goal, the cooperator is poorly equipped to show his cooperative

intention. His cooperative play will be exploited, and if he plays the other

(D) alternative it will be interpreted not as an attempt to defend himself

but as an act of aggression. Thus, faced with a determined competitor in

the PDG, the cooperator has no way of turning the play toward cooperation. He must play the competitive alternative in self-defense and

the relationship rapidly becomes one of mutual punishment. The competitor, meanwhile, is quite unaware of his causal role in producing the

conflict, mistakenly assuming that everyone else, like himself, has competitive intentions.

Although the basic experiment of the Kelley and Stahelski research is

the PDG, the authors report similar effects from other studies, using, for

example, the game of Chicken and another (modeled after the Deutsch

and Krauss trucking game) in which the two players must share a limited

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

facility that only one at a time can use. In these games, as well, the

cooperator’s behavior rapidly assimilates to that of the competitor: competition dominates. These two games share with the PDG a critical

property: the cooperator has no unambiguous way of communicating his

cooperative intention. He has only the choice between being systematically exploited or making a move in which his effort to defend

himself is likely to be attributed to an aggressive intent. In these circumstances, and the real world situations to which they generalize, one

determined aggressor can start a process that irresistibly generates reciprocal aggression.

The assimilative effects we have described may not occur if the repertory of possible behaviors is expanded. Miller and\Holmes (1975) have

studied this possibility in the context of an expanded PDG (see Figure 8.5)

in which a withdrawal alternative is added to the PDG. This alternative

permits the cooperator to protect himself from severe damage while

clearly communicating his lack of aggressive intent. Miller and Holmes

show that the withdrawal response does indeed protect the cooperator

from being assimilated to the competitor’s aggressive overtures. Unilateral aggression does not start an irresistible escalation of conflict.

Defensive

withdrawal

. eee

Defensive

withdrawal

Figure 8.5

An expanded PDG, adapted from Miller and Holmes (1975).

We have commented earlier on other factors that may inhibit the

escalation of conflict. When the relationship contemplates a long future of

ATTRIBUTION AND SELF-PRESENTATION

coexistence from which exit is difficult and in which uncontrolled conflict

can be damaging to both sides, a perception of the common interest may

produce caution. Then, it can be hoped, rashness in initiating aggression

will be curbed and, if aggression occurs by mistake or momentary

impulse, the response will not be immediate retaliation in kind but rather

the functional equivalent of a defensive withdrawal.

time

rages e in

enea,

dike “anveity,

‘tt

Interdependence

in Triads

Components of Triadic Interdependence, 244

Person C’s Effects on the A-B Relationship, 246

Analysis of A’s and B’s Outcome in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship, 246

Alternative Method of Analysis, 248

C’s Control Components, 250

Specific Interventions by C, 250

Changing the Value and Meaning of Behavior, 250

Changing the Correspondence between A’s and B’s Outcomes, 255

Facilitating the A-B Relationship, 258

Disrupting the A-B Relationship, 261

The Dyad’s Power over C, 262

Analysis of C’s Outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship, 262

A and B’s Controls over C, 263

Triads Based on Compounded Dyadic Relations, 268

Types of Constant-Sum Game in the Triad, 271

Outcome Correspondence and Cognitive Balance in the Triad, 275

Vanes

oa!

ie liar

Leo —ayreny) apy

wien

soe sin:

sUheTe

hid > 3

NGil

=e.

i P

“Sil al sqrPrniyt 7s ots ;

“WA

ties tleiias

baat

oli tall stant) Bebe

rwecatras

las ee

—~s

+ Mie wit Gh eee ents

S.-~

of) dense ertia)

ABSTRACT

An analysis is made of the components of triadic interdependence. This analysis

provides the basis for a discussion of the third person’s possible effects on the

dyad—how the dyad can be strengthened, changed, or disrupted by a representative of the social environment. Attention is then focused on the consequences for the third person of the dyad’s behavior, viewed in terms of the power

of the dyad over the ‘‘outsider.”’ In final sections consideration is given to

full-blown, three-way interdependence with special emphasis on some phenomena

unique to the triad (relative to the dyad).

We now consider the consequences for the dyad of the actions of a third

person. In adding the third person to our analysis, we are not simply

interested in its generalization to the triad, although that is one of our

purposes. We also view the third person as epitomizing the social context

in which the dyad exists. The ways in which person C can affect the A-B

pair reveal how the dyad can be strengthened, changed, or disrupted by

its social environment. The ways in which the pair can cope with C’s

interventions reveal their resources for dealing with external social

opportunities and threats.

Among the many ways in which C can affect the interaction between A

and B only certain ones are considered here. An important distinction is

whether C affects the interdependence between A and B or whether he

merely affects the process by which they cope with a particular pattern of

interdependence. As an example of the latter, he may provide signals to

help them to solve a coordination problem (just as the coxswain performs

this function for larger groups). Another example would be the escrow

officer at a bank who handles the process details that ensure that the

terms of a contract are met by both sides before an exchange is made. In

a sense his role is to guarantee simultaneity of action according to

agreement. Other examples would involve C’s aid to the pair in understanding their interdependence, his help in the intercommunication of

intentions, and his decisions on their behalf as an arbitrator when the

conflict prevents them from making their own (see Thibaut and Walker,

1975, for further analysis of this process). Our analysis excludes such

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

contributions to process and is restricted to the third person’s effect on the

interdependence between A and B. It does, however, include examples in

which C plays a role in the evocation of values, for, as we have seen, they

affect the way in which A and B are effectively interdependent.

Patterns of interdependence in the triad are far more complicated than

those in the dyad. In the interest of clear presentation we focus first on A’s

and B’s respective outcomes and the impact on them of C’s actions. This

forms the basis for considering the interplay between A and B as an

ongoing dyad and C as an intervening “outsider.” Subsequently we

consider how C’s outcomes vary within the three-way relationship. This

focuses our attention on the consequences for him of A’s and B’s actions

and affords the means of analyzing their power over him. Then, the

two-versus-one perspective is set aside for a full-blown, three-person

analysis and we consider some phenomena unique to the triad. This

constitutes the first step in generalizing the dyadic analysis to larger

multiperson groups, although we have left that for others to do.

COMPONENTS OF TRIADIC INTERDEPENDENCE

It is necessary first to orient ourselves to the complexities that are introduced, at least potentially, by extending the analysis to the level of the

triad. This is conveniently done in terms of the components of interdependence that exist in the triad. Figure 9.1 reminds us of the relation

between the components of interdependence in the dyad and the analysis

of variance paradigm. As we stated in Chapter 2, dyadic interdependence

is analogous to an experimental design in which there are two independent variables (the two persons A andB) and two dependent variables

(A’s and B’s respective outcomes). The analysis of variance model reveals

that there may be three sources of variance in each person’s outcomes, his

own main effect (RC), the partner’s main effect (FC), and their joint effect

(BC). These three sources account for the variance of each set of outcomes

Source of

Person affected

Control

RC,

FC,

FC,

RC,

BC,

BC,

Figure 9.1

The components of dyadic interAverage

GM,

GMsz

dependence expressed in terms of the analysis

of variance.

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

around its particular average level or grand mean (GM). The three

sources of variance are referred to as types of control. The subscript

following each control term in the figure denotes the person affected by it.

Figure 9.2 shows the same analysis made for the triad. There are now

three independent variables, corresponding to the three persons, and

three dependent variables, corresponding to their respective outcomes.

The number of possible sources of variance in each person’s outcomes is

increased to seven. It becomes necessary to supplement the subscripts

following each control term (which indicate the person affected by it) with

subscripts preceding each term to indicate the person or persons who

exercise the control. Thus ,FC¢ refers to fate control exercised by A over

person C. The necessity for this double coding is apparent. Three possible

sources of fate control act on A, one exercised by B, a second, by C, anda

third, by B and C, acting jointly (g-¢FC 4). The same is true for each person

and for BC as well. If the reader finds it confusing that the three-way

interaction terms translate into BC exercised over a person by the joint

actions of his two partners, it might be well to review the meaning of BC in

the dyadic components. The ,BC, term reflects the joint effect on A’s outcome of his and B’s actions. By virtue of this joint effect, when B modifies

his action, the BC component creates a reason for A to modify his also,

hence, the behavior control. Similarly, the effect of the

A x B x C

interaction on A’s outcomes (gcBC ,) implies that because all three persons jointly exercise an effect on A’s outcomes, if B and C jointly change

their actions his distribution of outcomes provides a reason for A to make

a corresponding shift in his action. The reader will note that the subscripts

preceding the RC terms have been omitted. They are made unnecessary

by the definition of RC: only A can exercise reflexive control over A.

Source of

Person affected

‘Control

RC,

aFCg

aFCec

pFC,

RC,

pECc

cFC,

cFC,

A xB

BC,

aBCpg

apECe

A X~E

cBG,

acECs

aBCec

Bexee

pcFC,

cBC,

pBCc

I XS 133

pcBC,

acBC,

apBCc

Average

GM,

GMg3

GMce

Figure9.2

The components of triadic interdependence expressed in terms of the analysis

of variance.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

It is apparent that the introduction of a third person greatly increases

the complexity of the analysis. Compared with the six control components to be considered in the dyad (in Figure 9.1), there are twenty-one

such components for the triad (Figure 9.2). To facilitate our thinking

about this extensive array of components we first limit our consideration

to A’s and B’s outcomes, that is, to the A and B columns of Figure 9.2.

Here are listed the original six terms local to the A-B dyad and the

additional eight terms that in one way or another involve C’s exercise of

control. Then, when questions are raised about the power of A andB over

C, it will be necessary to take account of the seven terms in the C column

of Figure 9.2, in which C’s outcomes are subject to various types of

control.

PERSON C’s EFFECTS ON THE A-B

RELATIONSHIP

Analysis of A’s and B’s Outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship

The pattern of

A’s andB’s outcomes ina

triadic relationship in which each

person has two response alternatives can be represented by the pair of

matrices in Figure 9.3. These are simply the two halves of the 2 x 2 x 2

cube, corresponding to C’s separate responses, c,; and c,. This mode of

representing the relationship is convenient because it highlights the

change in the A-B relationship produced by C’s shifts in behavior.

Figure 9.3.

Representation of the 2 x2 x2 relationship asitinvolvesA’s andB’s outcomes.

Figure 9.3 shows a case in which C can by his choice of actions determine whether A and B are related in the manner of Chicken (c,) or PDG

(c2). As can be seen, C’s action also affects the variance and the average

st OnmmataO

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

level of outcomes between the two patterns. A complete analysis of this

three-way relationship appears in Figure 9.4, the original 2 x 2 x 2

pattern at the top and its components arrayed below it. Whereas in the

analysis of 2 x 2 relations the components are portrayed in successive 2 x

2 matrices, here the components of the 2 x 2 x 2 pattern are shown in

successive pairs of 2 X 2 matrices. The components of the analysis correspond to the seven pairs of terms in the A and B columns of Figure 9.2,

although ina

slightly different order. The first three terms are the familiar

ones involving only A and/orB and can be readily calculated by averaging

the c, and c, matrices and analyzing the average matrix. The remaining

four terms involve C’s sole or joint control over A’s and B’s outcomes. The

fate control C exercises over the others reflects the difference between the

two matrices in average outcomes. Thus cFC, is readily calculated by

averaging A’s outcomes in the c, and c, matrices and taking the difference. The next two terms can be calculated by averaging separately

over A and overB. TheB x C matrix obtained by averaging over A can be

analyzed into its components to show cBC, and gcFC,. Similarly, the

analysis of the A x C matrix obtained by averaging over B reveals cBC,

and 4cFCs. Once all the terms are calculated ,¢cBC, and ,4cBC, can be

calculated as a remainder in a manner similar to that used for determining

the MBC component of a 2 x 2 matrix; that is, values are entered in the

lowermost matrices of Figure 9.4, as needed, to make the seven pairs of

component matrices add up to the original ones. The clue that the books

are balanced is that the matrices for scBC, and ,cBC,; have regular

behavior control patterns, although reversed in direction between the

left and right matrices, as in Figure 9.4.

Alternative Method of Analysis

An alternative and simpler way to calculate the components of the2 x2 Xx

2 matrix begins with the components of thec ,;and c, matrices (Figure 9.3).

This method is important because it highlights the precise ways in which

C, by the controls he exercises, can alter the pattern of the relationship

between A and B. The notation and formulas are given in Figure 9.5. The

analyses of c,and c, matrices proceed as usual; the terms are given signs

according to their orientation with respect to the a,b, cell of each 2 x 2

matrix. (The formulas yield signs according to the components’ orientations to the a,b,c, cell of the 2 x 2 x 2 matrix.) Components that yield

high values in that cell are given positive signs and those yielding low

values are given negative signs. (This rule has been followed in giving

signs to the component weights in Figure 9.4). The seven pairs of forINTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

mulas are then applied to yield the indicated seven pairs of components.

The reasonableness of the first three pairs of formulas will be apparent

to the reader. Person A’s RC,

for the entire relationship is simply the

averaging of his RCs for its two halves. These formulas accomplish the

averaging Over c,and cy. The fourth pair of formulas takes account of the

fact that C’s fate control is reflected in any change between c, and c, in

average level of outcomes. The rationale underlying the last three formulas can be seen by referring to the corresponding component matrices

in Figure 9.4. The -BC,, term refers to the fact that A’s RC shifts from one

side to the other with a shift betweenc,and cy». Thus C’s behavior control

over A is greater when A’s RC in the two matrices operates in different

directions than, for example, when it operates in the same direction. In

the formula the difference between RC’, and RC", takes account of this

fact. Similarly, s-FC ,is larger to the degree that whenC makes one choice

B’s fate control over A is strong in one direction, and when C makes the

other choice it is strong in the other direction. Again, the difference

between FC’, and FC", reflects this fact. The same reasoning applies to

the g-cBC , component, which is large when B’s behavior control over A is

reversed in direction by a shift in C’s choice.

Matrix

Terms for the Components

RC’,, RC’s, FC’,, FC’, BC’,,.BC’s, GM'a, GM's

RC",, RC"s, FC",, FC"s, BC”,, BC”s, GM",, GM";

RC, = 1/2 (RC’, + RC’,)

RCg3 = 1/2 (RC’s + RC’s)

pPC, = 1/24FC' 7° FCs)

AFC, = 1/2 (FC’s + FC"s)

sBC, = 1/2 (BC’, + BC",)

aBCg = 1/2 (BC’s + BC"s)

cFC, = GM’, — GM",

cFC, = GM’; — GM";

cBC, oa 1/2 (RC', Pid RC")

cBC, = 1/2 (RC’s Ts RC’"s)

BcFC,4 = 1/2 (FC’,4 — FC",)

acFCg = 1/2 (FC’s — FCs)

pcBC, = 1/2 (BC’, — BC",)

acBCg = 1/2 (BC’s — BC"s)

Figure 9.5

Formulas for calculating components of the

AXBXC matrix from the components of the c, and c, matrices.

In the example shown in Figure 9.4 the last three terms act to change the

magnitude of components between c

, and C,, serving (a) to introduce the

RCs inc,, although there was none inc ,, (b) to increase the magnitude of

the FCs incy, and (c) to eliminate the BCs present inc,. The first and last of

these changes are necessary, of course, to shift the relationship from the

pattern of Chicken to that of PDG.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

C’s Control Components

Figure 9.5 tells us how to calculate the components of the 2 x 2 x 2

relationship from the components of the two halves c, and c». Alternatively, we can view the formulas in terms of what they show about how

C’s control terms change the A-B relationship; that is, we can examine the

formulas to see what C control term must exist to form a shift between c,

andc,in any aspect of the A-B relationship. Similarly, the formulas show

the aspect of the relationship that is changed if any particular C control

component is present. The effect of C’s control components may be

summarized as follows:

1. The (FC ,and -FC,components do not change the pattern between the

c, and c, matrices because they do not affect the RC, FC, or BC

components of those matrices; C’s fate control simply changes the

general level of outcomes.

2. In contrast to FC, and CFC, the lower three pairs of components in

Figure 9.5 do serve to change the nature of the relationship between A

and B asC

shifts betweenc,andc,. Thus any change in the pattern of

the relationship between A and B can be traced to one or more of the

last three types of C’s control.

3. The -BC, and -BC; components change the direction and/or magnitude of A’s and B’s RC, between the c, and c, submatrices.

4. The gcFC, and ,4-FC,; components change the direction and/or magnitude of B’s fate control over A and A’s fate control over B, respectively, between the c, and c, submatrices.

5. The gcBC, and ,4cBCs components permit C to change the magnitude

and/or direction of sBC , and ,BC,. One possible consequence of this

kind of control is that C’s choice determines the nature of the coordination required between A and B. This is true when the ;,BC , and

ABC, terms are correspondent, as in the lower-most matrices of Figure

9.4.

Specific Interventions by C

Changing the Value and Meaning of Behavior

No attempt has been made systematically to examine the possible

antecedents of C’s types of control over the A-B relationship. Some examples, however, will serve to suggest types of antecedent and the

consequences of C’s possessing various types of control.

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

It is easy to imagine the circumstances under which C would have

cFC 4. This component merely requires his possession of commodities

that A desires, his ability to act in ways A finds rewarding, or his effectiveness in raising or lowering

A’s costs of interaction. Equally familiar are

the generic bases for cBC ,. Special combinations of A’s and C’s behavior

must be compatible from A’s point of view, these capabilities reflecting

facilitation effects with heightened reward and/or reduced costs, or

absences of interference effects with reduced rewards and/or increased

costs. (See Chapter 3 on Antecedents of the Given Matrix and Chapter 4

in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959.) For example, without C’s help (in statec,) A

may prefer doing a, toa». However, when C provides him with a special

tool for performing a, or guidance in its appreciation (this help constituting c,), A’s preference may shift to a, in view of the lower costs

and/or greater rewards associated with it.

A common phenomenon is

that the mere presence of another person interferes with the performance

of certain behaviors, increasing their costs and reducing the satisfaction

the actor derives from them. C’s two actions, c, and cy, may refer to C’s

presence and absence. If his presence interferes with one of A’s actions

but not the other, then the shift from c, to c; may change whether A

prefers a, or a».

The other two of C’s control components are more complexly determined. The term g-FC, means that C selectively affects A’s preferences

for B’s behaviors. (It also, of course, means equally that B selectively

affects A’s preferences for C’s behaviors, but here we are viewing these

terms in relation to C’s effects on the A and B relationship.) A simple

example is one in which both B and C give A one of two items and the

items are such that each has greater value if a person also possesses the

other. Thusb,andc, may consist of giving A a small dinghy andb,andc,

giving A a nylon sail for the dinghy. Obviously, if C does c,, A will prefer

b,, butifC doesc,A will prefer b,. Similarly, A may prefer a glass of wine

and a piece of cheese ‘to two glasses of wine or two pieces of cheese.

Consequently, b , (wine) will be preferred to b, (cheese) if C gives cheese,

but the preference will be reversed if C gives wine. In general, ,-FC,

requires that C be able selectively to interfere with or facilitate A’s enjoyment of B’s behaviors. Other examples similar to those for cBC , can be

given except that the selective effect of the tools or tutelege that C provides is on A’s appreciation of B’s actions rather than his own.

The g-BC, component, representing the most complex configuration

of outcomes, is the most difficult to illustrate. In general, C’s shift fromc,

to c, changes or redefines what is compatible or incompatible behavior

between A and B. If a, and b, represent one opinion on a controversial

polarized issue and a, and b,, the opposing opinion, then C’s successful

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

induction of pressure toward agreement (c,) would place value on a,b,

and a,b. combinations but his eliciting a norm of independent expression (C,) would place value on a,b, and a,b,.

A more trivial example in

which C changes the meaning of similarity between A and B is the

invitation to a costume ball with a prize for the most striking couple. This

invitation (c,) makes it desirable for a husband and wife to coordinate

their dress in contrast to the usual party invitation (c,) which carries no

such implication. Many examples of s-BC, can be developed from the

idea of optimal combinations of two and three tools or instruments. To

make music two roommates require an instrument and a score. If C

contributes nothing (c,), itis necessary for A to contribute one item and B

the other (i.e.,4,b, o0ra,b ,are the preferred combinations.) IfC contributes

the score (c.), inasmuch as only one score is needed, the preferred combination for A and B now becomes one in which both provide instruments

(a,b,), assuming both enjoy playing more than listening. (Example is

imperfect insofar as the a,b, cell, everyone providing a score, is still

unrewarding.)

Alternative methods of Changing Patterns.

We have seen that cBC,

changes the direction of RC ,

between the c, and c, matrices (RC’, versus

RC",) and g-FC , changes the direction of sFC , between the two matrices

(gFC’, versus pFC”,). Thus the concordance between the RC and FC

terms in thec,andc, matrices can be changed in two ways, either by cBC 4

and -BC, which affect the RC terms or by g-FC 4 and ,cFC,; which affect

the FC terms. From this it follows that there are alternative ways, shown

in Figure 9.6, in which C can change the A-8B relationship from, for

example, PDG to MDG. Beginning with discordance between the RC and

FC terms in the PDG (c ,) matrix, C’s actions can create concordance either

by reversing the direction of the RC terms (as in Case I by means of cBC ,

and -BC,) or by reversing the direction of the FC terms (as in Case II by

means of gcCFC, and ,cFC,).

The actions of A and B in Figure 9.6 might refer to those of two small

boys who possess different pairs of baseball trading cards. They agree to

give each other one card. In thec , matrix, of his two possible actions, boy

A slightly prefers (to the extent of 4 units) to give Y and keep X but B

strongly prefers (8 units worth) the opposite, that A give X and keep Y.

Symmetrically,

B somewhat prefers that he give Q and keep P but A

strongly prefers that B do the opposite. Thus at c,, without C’s intervention, they are in the typical PDG situation. In Case I C’s intervention is

to make each boy value more the one of his own cards that the partner

values less by pointing out (though separately to their owners) the virtues

of cards Y and Q. This shifts each boy’s preference to giving the other boy

the card that boy prefers. In Case II C’s intervention is to make each boy

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

(2)

Gives X

Gives Y

RC} —- RC’, = —4

Ree, = RC"; 4:

RC, =

RC, = -4

BCs,

Rey, = FC"; =

BcEC, = achkCG, =

Sig [e)

Figure 9.6

Two different ways for C to change the A-B relationship from PDG to MDG.

value more the one of his partner’s cards that the partner values less.

Again, the value-changing information (e.g., about rarity or quality)

would have to be given separately to the two boys or both would change

their preferences and the conflict aspect of the PDG would remain. [The

example is interesting in that it shows the basis of the PDG in shared

preference orderings in the context of agreement to exchange something.

In this context C’s RC- and FC-shifting interventions might be communicating preference-shifting information to the interdependent persons but separately so that the preference orders become negatively

correlated. |

Alternatively, in this example C might accomplish the shift in Case I by

invoking the value of generosity and pointing out its implication for giving

away to one’s friends the things one likes best. This would decrease each

boy’s satisfaction in keeping the card he most prefers and create a reward

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

for giving it. Along the same lines C’s intervention in Case II might consist

of emphasizing thealtruistic satisfactions to be gained from observing that

one’s friends possess valuable things. If this appeal were effective, each

boy would then prefer the other to keep the better card and give away the

less valuable one.

In any such situation inasmuch as the FC terms are the larger ones in

thec,andc, patterns, a stronger degree of control is required of C if he is to

succeed in the method illustrated by Case II. In the example given Case II

requires that C succeed in reversing a stronger initial preference than that

required for Case I. This is shown in Figure 9.6 by the relative absolute

magnitudes of g-FC, for Case II and -BC, for Case I.

It will probably be apparent to the reader that if C reversed the direction

of both the RC and FC terms of the PDG his effect would be simply to

interchange the meanings, defined in terms of the pattern, of each person’s

response alternatives, the ‘‘cooperative’’ choice becoming the ‘‘defecting’’ choice and vice versa. Thus, if C were able to produce both effects

described by Cases I and II by independently changing each boy’s preferences about his own possessions and the partner’s, then the ‘“cooperative exchange” would shift from the X and P cards to the Y and Q. If

accomplished by the invocation of generosity and altruistic values, the

cooperative exchange would, oddly enough, involve giving the partner

the least preferred card so that he could satisfy his altruistic interest but at

the expense of being able to satisfy one’s own interest in generosity.

Indeed, the ‘exploitative’ person would be one who managed to be

generous by giving a valuable card while also feeling altruistic from

having received a less valuable one from the partner!

We have used the PDG and MDG to illustrate the alternative ways in

which C can shift certain AB relationships from one pattern to another.

Similar illustrations can be provided for other shifts; for example, between perfectly noncorrespondent combinations of BRC and MFC and

perfectly correspondent ones, or between Battle of the Sexes and the

matrix to its right in Figure 4.3.

Reversible and Irreversible Effects. Not all the ways in which C can affect A’s

and B’s outcomes permit him to move back and forth betweenc,andc,at

will. This is not a question of which control component he exercises but of

the method by which he does so. For example, if C changes A’s preferences regarding his own or B’s action by tutelage in appreciation or by

invoking norms about good or valued behavior, C will have no dependable means of undoing what he has done. Some of his effects, then, are

likely to be irreversible, with the consequence that the power represented

by the relevant control component no longer exists.

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

Changing the Correspondence between A’s and B’s Outcomes

One important aspect of C’s effect on the A-B relationship is his impact on

the correspondence between their outcomes. This is basic to whether

they have a common interest in his actions or conflicting preferences

about what he does. This aspect of the analysis is essential to determining

whether his influence will be to strengthen their relationship or to

weaken it.

The analysis of this aspect of C’s effects begins by examining the

relevance of each of his types of control to the correspondence or noncorrespondence between A’s and B’s outcomes. If C has fate control over

both A and B, he controls a source of positive or negative covariation

between their outcomes. If FC, and CFC; are large and have the same

sign, they serve to increase markedly the correspondence between A’s

and B’s outcomes as calculated over the entire 2 xX 2 X 2 matrix. This is

illustrated in Figure 9.7 in which the A-B relationship is a PDG at each

RGod

= RGs

= 4

ERC, = RC pw

RC, =

RC; = —4

EC,

=FC’s =+8

FC", =FC’,;

gFC, = ,FC,; = +8

GM', = GM’;

GM", =GM"; = 16

CFC, = cFCs = —10

ICL = —.8

IC" = —.8

[Gea

Figure 9.7

Effect of C’s fate control to increase the degree of correspondence between

A’s and B’s outcomes over entire 2X22 matrix.

level of c; the index of correspondence in each case is —.8. For the entire 2

x2 x2 matrix IC = +.2. When -FC, and (FC; have opposite signs, they

serve to increase the noncorrespondence for A and B over the entire

matrix. This is illustrated in Figure 9.8. The point of these examples is that

as C varies his behavior he either affects A and B in the same way (as in

9.7) or differently (as in 9.8). In the first case they have a common interest

to induce C to remain at cy. In the second case A wants him to remain atc,

but B prefers him to enactc,. In Figure 9.7 the higher correspondence for

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the total matrix compared with the separate matrices implies that by

intermittent variation in his action’C keeps the entire range of outcomes

salient for A and B. They are likely, then, to perceive their common

interest (in having C enact c,) rather than their more conflictful relationship at each level of c. The high degree of noncorrespondence for the

entire matrix in Figure 9.8 implies that to their partial conflict in the PDG

pattern at each level of c has been added a conflict about which action to

induce C to take.

GM’, = GM’; =

GM", = 16

cFC, = —10

GM"; = —4

cFC, =) +10

ICs 8

Figure 9.8

Effect of C’s fate control to increase the degree of noncorrespondence between

A’s and B’s outcomes over entire 2x22 matrix.

It may be noted that it is meaningful in these situations to refer to the

concordance or discordance between -FC , and CFCs. Just as there may be

concordance or discordance between a person’s control over his own

outcomes and his control over another’s (e.g., RC , may be concordant or

discordant with ,FC,), there may also be concordance or discordance

between a given person’s control over a second person’s outcomes and

his control over a third person’s outcomes. Both types of concordance

affect the correspondence between the outcomes of the two affected

persons (A and B in the examples).

In the case above, the effect of C is to contribute to the correspondence or

noncorrespondence between A and B by variation in his action. In the

cases to follow C’s change of action produces a change in the correspondence between A and B. In Figure 9.9 C changes the A-B relationship from a noncorrespondent pattern of BRC + MFC to a correspondent one. In the example the means of producing this change is

cBC, and cBCg. However, as we have seen, the same shift can be

produced alternatively by g-FC, and ,cFC,. It is simply a matter of

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

Noncorrespondent

Correspondent

RC’, = RC’,

RC”, = RC", = +6

cBC, = cBC, = —6

FC’, = FC’,

FC", = FC", = +6

aFCg = gFC, = +6

IC” = +1.0

IC = .0

Figure 9.9

Effect of -BC, and -BC, in shifting the A-B relationship from noncorrespondent to correspondent.

whether C’s shift reverses the direction of the RCs or FCs betweenc, and

Cy. In Figure 9.10 C shifts the A-B relationship from noncorrespondent

MBC to correspondent MBC. This can be accomplished by using either

gcBC 4 Or ,cBC,, the latter being shown in the figure. In both cases the

degree of conflict between A and B is higher for one of C’s actions than for

the other. By shifting his behavior C can determine whether it is possible

for A and B to enjoy their best outcomes at the same time. Obviously, in

this manner his action determines the maximum joint outcomes they can

achieve. They are likely, then, to have a common interest in inducing C to

take the action that heightens the correspondence of their relationship.

Bee = +12

Be; a apd

sBC, = +12

BC’, = —12

BC’, = +12

,4cBC,; = —12

IC’ = —1.0

IG = F10

IC = .0

Figure 9.10

Person C changes the correspondence of the mutual behavior control

relationship between A and B.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

(It is not meaningful in these last cases to describe C’s effects as concordant or discordant. His effect is tovary the concordance or discordance

between, say, RC’, and ,FC’s or to vary the correspondence or noncorrespondence between, say ,BC’; and ;BC’,.)

In summary, A and B may have a common interest in C’s taking a

particular action for either or both of two reasons: (a) It increases both

their outcomes and (b) it places them in a situation of high correspondence in which both are able to attain their high outcomes at the

same time. The first is true when C’s two actions affect their rewards and

costs in the same way, cFC , being concordant with CFC 3; for example, the

adult chaperone may by her presence disrupt the young couple’s uninhibited and rewarding love making. The second is true when C is able to

determine (a) the degree to which A’s and B’s RCs and FCs are concordant

(e.g., the fond parents of a young bride provide her and her husband with

household equipment that makes it easier for them to do the chores they

expect of each other, thus reducing RC discordant with FC) or (b) the

degree to which A’s and B’s BCs are correspondent [e.g., the friend who

(c») provides piano accompaniment to the pair of violinists, one of whom

must otherwise (c;) do the unrewarding job of providing the accompaniment while the other enjoys playing the violin ].

Facilitating the A-B Relationship

By his effect on the correspondence between A’s and B’s outcomes C can

strengthen

or weaken

their relationship.

Further

aspects of this

phenomenon are examined in Chapter 10’s discussion of coalitions.

Meantime we shall look at some rather specific ways in which he can

promote or facilitate their relationship.

The Circular Relationship.

Person B may be unilaterally dependent on A,

affected by ,FC, or ,BC, but without any power over A. Person C can

transform this into a relationship of mutual dependence if he is able to

exercise some form of control over A, either CFC, or -BC,4. We might

wonder why C would do this on B’s behalf, but one clear case would be

when B has similar control over him, either ,FC¢ or ;BCc. Thus in one

simple case C makes possible a circular pattern of fate control; he is willing

to help A if A will then help B because B will then help him. An example is

provided by three roommates with different needs and skills. Albert, the

astronomy student, can help Bob with his calculus problems while Bob,

son of a garage mechanic, can repair the clutch in Carl’s BMW if Carl, a

major in Romance languages, will tutor Albert for his French exam. The

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

circular nature of the pattern is indicated by the subscripts of the three

terms: ,FCs, gFCc, and CFC ,.

It can be seen that C does more than simply facilitate the A-B relationship. He actually makes it possible.

A and B have a common interest

in having C enact c,. A’s interest is direct—he profits directly fromc,. B’s

interest is indirect—he wants C to enactc , because A does and he wants to

please

A. Furthermore, A andB have means of satisfying their interests; A

by inducing B to benefit C and thereby to induce C to benefit A, and B, by

inducing C to benefit A so that A will benefit B.

In this situation any reciprocated FC (e.g., CFC, as a reciprocation for

p°C) would render superfluous the other two FCs (in the example ,FC,

and (FC,). The two persons with mutual fate control could do as well

without the third person as with him; therefore his inclusion would be in

doubt. In general, we might expect that arranging the exchange of

benefits between two persons would be simpler than managing the

circular ‘pass it on’’ pattern with the three persons and would therefore

tend to be preferred.

A circular pattern of dependence may also be based on BC; for example,

the operative controls would be ,BC3, sBCc, and -BC 4. Here each term

might imply that the second person (the one ‘‘controlled’’”) would get

satisfaction from comparing his own behavior with that of the first person

(the one exercising the control). Without C, A has no reason to remainina

relationship with B, but ifC is oriented toward comparison withB and A is

oriented toward comparison with C then a three-way relationship is

possible. In each case the satisfaction may come from similarity (matching

the comparison person) or from dissimilarity (mismatching). Not all

combinations of these preferences, however, are equally good for the trio.

It is fairly easy to show that for maximal correspondence among the three

persons’ outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 case (for all three to be able to gain

reward at the same time), either all three must prefer matching their

comparison persons or one must prefer matching and the other two,

mismatching. The proof of this statement is found in the simple demonstration that with only two responses each there is no pattern of their

three choices that will fulfill the requirements of either two matches and

one mismatch or three mismatches. We analyze this phenomenon in

greater detail when we consider the relation between outcome correspondence and cognitive balance.

Improving the Reward-Cost Balance.

Consider the case in which the A-B

relationship is of marginal benefit to its participants because their costs in

delivering rewards to each other are almost as great as the value of those

rewards (e.g., RC, is discordant with ,FC, and almost equal in magINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

nitude). C can increase the profitability of the interaction if (a) he is

rewarded by the same actions by which A andB reward each other, (b) A’s

and B’s costs are increased very little in the triad, and (c) C has means of

rewarding them. This is best exemplified by informative or entertaining

actions that lose little of their value by being performed for the benefit of

more than one person and the costs of which increase little with small

increment in the number of recipients. A’s costs are reduced by the

addition of the third person, at least in relation to the rewards he delivers.

In general, if the rewards are such (shareable and mutually enjoyable)

that the total reward value of A’s action increases more with the addition

of the third person than his costs do and if the same is true for B, thenaC

who is able to reciprocate the rewards will make possible a triad that is

more satisfying to all than any dyad would be. Thibaut and Kelley

provide other illustrations of this and related functions of the third person

(1959, pp. 196-197).

The Middle Man.

Someaspects of the preceding cases are involved in the

third person who, in the interests of reward-cost improvement, is the

middle man in certain aspects of the A-B exchange. Consider the lonely

woman (A) who wishes to employ an escort (B) for occasional social

events. For reasons given in the Chapter 3 discussion of the incompatibility of such rewards as money and affectionate attention it may be

mutually interfering (cost raising and reward reducing) for her to give

money directly to the escort. A third person, the agent for an escort

service, can intervene to pass the money along from the employer to the

escort (while taking a small commission). This serves to conceal the

economic aspect of the A-B interaction and, by permitting them to limit

their direct exchanges to social-emotional resources, to maintain the

reward value of these resources at a high level.

A middle man may also handle the exchange between A and B of all the

relevant resources. This usually occurs for reasons of cost cutting. IfA and

B find it too costly to transmit rewards to each other but, for some reason,

economical to transmit them to C, and if they are the kinds of reward that

can be passed along, then C may make possible an indirect exchange

where no direct one is possible. The examples in economic relations

(wholesaler, retail distributor) are commonplace. In informal social relations a symmetrical version of Longfellow’s story about Miles Standish

and Priscilla Mullens, with John Alden as the middle man, would serve as

an illustration.

Facilitating Turn Taking.

In the turn-taking game, if A and B persist in

pursuing their immediate interests, neither gains anything. A third perINTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

son can sometimes modify the problem by pointing out the wisdom of

turn taking, perhaps supporting the argument with reference to the

values of max joint and min diff. The effect is to induce a shift in the A-B

relationship from a2 X 2 pattern of high conflict to an extended pattern of

sequential play in which, with the value transformations, A and B have

high correspondence of outcomes. An experimental example is provided

by Deutsch’s research (1966) on tutored communication in the trucking

game.

Disrupting the A-B Relationship

Inducements to Discordant Behavior.

C may have more fate control over B

than A. If so, and if he so desires, C can induce B to take actions that are

discordant in the A-B matrix. C’s interest in doing this would reflect some

divergence between his own preferences about B’s behavior and A’s

preferences (e.g., gFCc is discordant with gFC,). For example, a daughter

has been pursuing her school work (which her mother wants) and her

mother has been providing additions to the girl’s wardrobe. A young man

whose “hold” over the girl is greater than that of the mother may make

his presence contingent ona

different activity, one he finds rewarding but

that the mother does not. This is illustrated in Figure 9.11 where the cells

to which the young man (C) restrains the interaction (by his contingency

rule) are heavily outlined. The matrix analysis suggests that the young

man does not increase the noncorrespondence between mother and

daughter over the entire 2 x 2 xX 2 relationship, but he does create a

sharp conflict between them in the portion to which he limits the interaction in converting his fate control to behavior control.

Invoking Antisocial Values.

If two boys are in a Chicken situation (e.g.,

armed and surely able to hurt each other if they fight), a third person can

Young man absent

Present

Figure 9.11

Person C creates conflict between A and B by converting his FC; to BC.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

sometimes strengthen the hand of one against the other; for example, if a

close friend of A makes it clear that he will disdain A if he backs away from

the danger, B knows that A now has strong RC operating on him to take

the risky action. The friend’s presence and comment increases the plausibility that A will pursue the dangerous course. This, of course, makes a

similar course more dangerous for B and indirectly increases A’s chances

to come out the winner.

Because of the advantage C’s action gives him, A may be tempted to

create the same situation himself by making statements to his friend

which imply that he (A) is to be considered a coward if he does not follow

through with his aggressive intentions. The problem in either case is that

the evocation of the value of bravery may be effective for B as well, acting

to make the risky course more desirable than the safe one, regardless of its

outcome. Indeed, a third person’s general labeling of the challenge situation in such value terms may push the pair into a mutually destructive

(though, in terms of transformed RC, mutually rewarding) course.

Asymmetrical Invocation of Prosocial Norms.

Inathreat game C may invoke

a loyalty norm for the threatener. This increases his reluctance to use his

threat power (increases the RC against taking the mutually destructive

action) and renders him more susceptible to the allocator’s exploitation.

Thus, although invoking the prosocial norms relevant to both the

allocator and the threatener (fairness as well as loyalty) may work to the

long-term advantage of the pair (by helping them to avoid a costly series

of disruptions in the interests of justice), the asymmetrical invocation of

loyalty may set the stage for exploitation and eventual disruptive rebellion.

THE DYAD’S POWER OVER C

Analysis of C’s Outcomes in the 2 x 2 x 2 Relationship

Figure 9.12 describes the outcomes forC, one of three young men sharing

an apartment. His outcomes are shown as they are affected on a typical

evening by his own actions (whether he sings or reads) and the actions of

his two roommates (whether A sings or reads and whether B plays the

piano or reads). The format is similar to that in Figure 9.3 except that the

only outcomes in the matrix are those of C. The sources of variance in C’s

outcomes for this situation are analyzed in Figure 9.13. This analysis

suggests the main reasons underlying the distribution of C’s outcomes. It

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

Figure 9.12

Person C’s outcomes as affected by his own actions and by those of A andB.

makes little difference to him, on the average, whether he sings or reads

(RC¢ is small). He has some slight preference for A to read rather than

sing and a somewhat stronger preference for B to play the piano rather

than read (4FCc and gFCc¢ terms). The most important component of his

interests is that he prefers to sing when A does and not to sing when A

does not (to read when A reads). This is the ,BC- component. He has a

very slight preference not to sing when B plays the piano and to sing

when B reads (sBC-). He has a moderately strong preference for A and B

to act in a “similar’’ manner, that is, both to make music or both to read

(,sFC-), and this preference is particularly strong when he himself is

singing (i.e., when he is reading he would prefer that one of the others be

making music). The latter is indicated by 4sBCc.

A and B’s Controls over C

C’s preferences mean, of course, that A

andB

have certain kinds of control

over him. Our example indicates all the possible kinds of control. Individually, A and B have FC and BC which can be used cumulatively. Thus

in our example A and B can vary C’s outcomes over a 5-unit range by

coordinated use of their FCs, moving froma,b,toa,b ,. Similarly, they can

combine their respective BCs to exercise a 7-unit degree of BC over C,

although most of the effect here is A’s. This process also requires that A

and B coordinate on the a, b, versus a,b, combinations of their actions.

(The former motivates C to doc, for 7 points or take 0 points with cz, and

so on.) These examples point to an important fact: the cumulative use

of their individual controls over C, either FC or BC, requires A and B to

coordinate their actions. To combine their respective controls they must

limit themselves to two of the four possible combinations of their actions.

Jointly, A and B also have FC and BC over C. As shown in Figure 9.13,

however, these are exercised by varying whether they “match” their

actions; that is, by which of the two diagonal pairs of combinations of

2 Xx 2 x 2 pattern

Components

Component weights

aFCc

pBFCc

AaBCc

pBCc

apFCc

a8e)

asBCc

Figure 9.13

Analysis of C’s outcomes in the 2x22 pattern from Figure 9.12.

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

their actions their choices represent. Thus in the example A and B can use

their joint fate control to give C 3 units simply by doing behaviors with

matching subscripts. Similarly, via ,,BCc, their matching behaviors

motivate C to do c, and their mismatched behaviors motivate him to

do Cy.

The cumulative and joint components of A’s and B’s control over C can

be contrasted in the following ways:

1. In the cumulative use of their separate powers A and B must coordinate

between two specific combinations of their actions if they are to have

maximum effect. Failure of such coordination, however, does not preclude one having some effect.

2. In the use of their joint power, A and B must coordinate between two

specific pairs of combinations of their actions (the pairs defined by the

two diagonals). Either member of a certain pair will have the desired

effect. Failure of such coordination totally precludes having the desired

effect. In short, in (1) the coordination requirements are more severe

but may be partly fulfilled, whereas in (2) the coordination requirements are less severe but are absolute.

One common kind of power combines the worst properties of cumulative and joint power. Referred to by Thibaut and Kelley (1959) as conjunctive power, it is illustrated in Figure 9.14. A and B deliver a reward to

C only if they coordinate on 4,b,. Thus the coordination requirement is

both severe and absolute. The analysis of the components reveals the

reason. Although each person’s contribution to the requirement is

rewarding to C (4FCc and ,FC¢), each partial contribution is negative for

him in the absence of the other part (,4,FC -). The mirror image of conjunctive power is disjunctive power in which C is rewarded, unless, say,

the single a,b, combination occurs. Here the best aspects of cumulative

and joint power are combined: the coordination requirements are mild

and the effect is maximal with their fulfillment. The analysis of this

pattern (in Figure 9.15) shows that the joint power of A and B (43FCc)

compensates for any partial failures to coordinate optimally in the

cumulative use of their separate powers.

The analysis of C’s outcomes reveals the means that A and B have of

controlling them, and potentially, of controlling C’s behavior. In the

preceding section we discussed the reasons that A and B may have for

wishing to control C’s actions, and in this section we cover the resources

they have for doing so. We now take up the three sets of outcomes

simultaneously and consider some phenomena unique to the triad. Later

we return to the interaction between A and B on the one hand and C on

—12

Figure 9.14

A and B’s conjunctive power over C and its components.

a fit

ABFCc

Figure 9.15

A and B’s disjunctive power over C and its components.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

the other, as we analyze a possible coalition against C or his coalition with

one of them against the other.

TRIADS BASED ON COMPOUNDED

DYADIC RELATIONS

Because a triad includes three dyads, one possible special form of triadic

interdependence is that in which a certain two-person game is played

simultaneously and in synchrony in each of the three pairings. Thus, if A

and B are ina PD game, each also, separately but simultaneously, plays

the same PD game with C; the single constraint is that the choice a

person makes in one relationship is also the choice he makes in the

other.

Following Hamburger (1973), we describe as a compound game one in

which each person of the triad plays “several 2-person games simultaneously” (p. 33) and ‘is required to make the same choice in each of

these

. 2-person games he is playing” (p. 38). The first limits us to

relationships based on components found in the dyad (e.g., 4FCc¢, gBC 4,

and RC¢, but not g-FC 4 or 4cFC) and the second property permits us to

characterize the relationship in a 2 X 2 Xx 2 matrix.

From the point of view of the A-B relationship, compounding has the

consequences that (a) the relationship between A and B atc ,andc,may be

different from the relationship that is compounded and (b) their relationship at c, may be different from that at c,. The implications of these

facts are that A and B must treat their relationship in a different way

when it is part of the three-way interaction and further, when (b) is

true, that the nature of their relationship may depend on what action C

takes.

Let us begin with examples of the first phenomenon. We asserted in

Chapter 5 that in the optimal dyadic PDG the amount a person benefits

the partner by the C choice is about twice as big as the self-benefit he

forgoes by doing so. Therefore for a proper compounding of PDG it is

necessary to have the person’s RC equal to half the total benefit he delivers

to his partners. A 2 Xx 2 X 2 relationship based on this idea is shown in

Figure 9.16. A’s and B’s outcomes are shown in the upper portion of the

table and C’s, in corresponding locations in the lower portion. The outcomes reflect the facts that each C response yields each partner one unit of

reward, or a total of two units, and that each D response gives the actor

one unit of reward. That this is a proper triadic PDG relationship is shown

by the fact that the more persons choosing C, the higher the total score,

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

A's and B's

outcomes

outcomes

Figure 9.16

Compound PDG.

but, whatever the other persons’ choices are, an individual always gets a

higher score by choosing D than C. The reasons are apparent:

1. By his choice of C a person puts more into the system than by a choice

of D.

2. As far as his own interests go, a person is always better off to give

himself the smaller benefit than to generate the larger one for his

partners.

It will be noted in Figure 9.16 that, whatever

C’s choice, the relationship

between A and B is a constant-sum game. They divide up two units (if C

withholds his benefits) or four units (if he delivers them). Thus the

three-way PDG is not reflected in a PDG between each pair of persons

when the third person’s choice is held constant. The constant-sum property of the A-B relationship reflects the fact that, for example, —RC , is

equal to ,FC,. If each person’s RC is made smaller than half the total FC he

controls, the A-B relationship is a PDG, whether C chooses his cooperative or his competitive response.

Correspondent MBC provides another example in which the A-B relationships atc, and c, differ from the dyadic pattern compounded. Figure

9.17 shows a compounding of correspondent MBC. Each person receives

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

A's and B's

outcomes

C's

outcomes

Figure 9.17

Compound correspondent MBC.

a reward from each of his partners whose response he manages to match.

In the case shown each person gets two units of reward if the trio enacts

a,b ,C, OF AybyC». In all other cells two persons get one reward each and the

third, no reward. The last is the person who has failed to coordinate. The

two fortunate ones get their rewards from matching each other. The

“deviate” who fails to match his partners deprives them of a unit of

reward and gets nothing himself.

It can be seen in Figure 9.17 thatif A and B know whatC has done before

making their choices they have RC for their own choices. The A-B relationship is the same at c, and c, but the rows and columns are interchanged; that is, the RCs are reversed in direction. In general, once one

person acts in this situation the others find it their best bet to coordinate

with him. Such coordination benefits everyone, the first person included,

and the relationship encourages the emergence of someone who takes the

initiative and thereby “directs’’ the others in achieving the mutually

beneficial coordination.

The second phenomenon, that the c,; and c. matrices may differ with

compounding, was first noted by Hamburger (1973). This is the more

interesting possibility because it implies that if A and/or B can determine

what C’s choice will be, their strategy for making their decision(s) may

differ, depending on what he does. Our analysis reveals that this

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

phenomenon occurs only when the compounded game involves BC in

combination with FC and /or RC. This is shown by a consideration of the

following:

1. Only components from dyadic relationships can be included in the

compounding, by definition of the term.

2. The formulas in Figure 9.5 show that the only differences in patterning

between thec ,;andc, matrices produced by a dyadic C-control term are

those produced by -BC, and -BCg. The RC¢ term is irrelevant and the

cFC, and FC, terms change only the average level betweenc,andc,

and not the pattern.

3. BC, and -BCgalone (applied symmetrically, as they must be in compounding) act, in effect, to reverse the labeling between the c,and c,

matrices. This was apparent in Figure 9.17 in which the c, matrix is

simply the c , matrix with the subscripts interchanged for each person’s

responses.

4. Given -BC, and -BC;,, if the compound game also involves FC and/or

RC components, the reversal of the RC terms between c, and c, produces a change in pattern rather than a mere reversal of labels. This

results from the change in concordance between the RC terms and the

BC and FC terms of the submatrices.

Some examples that illustrate this phenomenon are shown in Figure 9.18

which presents compound Chicken (MFC and MBC) and compound

Hero (BRC and MBC). It can be seen that with the compounding of

Chicken the A-8 relationship shifts from some combination of PDG and

Battle of the Sexes atc, to a rather cooperative game similar to MDG at c».

For the compounding of Hero the shift is from a simple coordination

game atc, to Martyr at Cc».

TYPES OF CONSTANT-SUM GAME IN THE TRIAD

The relationship of perfect conflict in the dyad entails a conflict between

the actor’s interests and those of his partner. In the one case (NCR MBC)

the two persons prefer different combinations of behavior. In the other

(BRC equal to and discordant with MFC) there is a perfect conflict between giving reward to the partner and keeping it for oneself. These two

kinds of constant-sum game have their parallels in the triad and it may

alsoinvolvea

third type of conflict. Figure 9.19 showsa constant-sum game

based on noncorrespondent MBC. In this particular example one person

in each pair gains a reward for matching the second and the second gains

22,

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Compound Chicken

Figure 9.18.

A’s and B’s outcomes for compound Chicken and Hero.

a reward for not matching the first. Thus A tries to match B but B tries not

to match A, A tries not to match C but C tries to match A, and B tries to

match C but C tries not to match B. The resulting pattern is a game in

which the three persons divide three units of reward, according toa1:1:1

or2:1:0 ratio. The first occurs with a set of responses that lets each person

satisfy one of his two requirements (e.g., a,b,c ,) and the second occurs

when one person is able to satisfy both of his requirements (e.g., a1b,C2.

makes A the lucky fellow). Here as with compound CR MBC, if A and B

know what C has done, they have RC. However, when they have this

information and act accordingly, C gets no reward (as in a,b,c ,); therefore

no one will want to make a first choice that can be known by the others.

Is there a basis here for two persons to act together, either to gain good

outcomes for themselves at the expense of the third or to ensure an equal

distribution of rewards among the three? With regard to the first possibility, it may be noted that when A gets two rewards C gets one, but

when C gets two rewards it is B who gets one and not A (who gets one

when B gets two). (The particular pair-relations here depend on the one

of two ways in which the

NCR MBCsare fitted together.) Thus there is no

basis for a two-person exchange agreement that freezes out the third. In

relation to a dyad’s ensuring the 1:1:1 distribution it can be seen that any

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

Figure 9.19

Constant-sum game based on noncorrespondent MBC.

pair can make it at least as desirable for the third person to cooperate in

such a distribution as not to. If A and B enact a,b,, C gains as much by

enacting

c ,

(which yields 1:1:1) as by enacting c, (which yields 2:0:1). Of

course, if for some reason he believes he can do better than one reward

per occasion, C may attempt to disrupt the A-B coalition by favoring A.A

and B might guard against a cumulative effect of this sort by alternatively

setting up for a,b,c, and a,b,c, were it not for the fact that in both cases C’s

failure to do his part for equality results in A’s advantage. Thus it is clear

that A and B are stymied, even as between forcing C to cooperate in an

equal division or freezing him out with alternating 2:1 rewards for themselves.

The triadic version of the constant-sum game in which RCs and FCs are

equal in magnitude but discordant is shown in Figure 9.20. In creating

this type of pattern, it is necessary to set each person’s RC equal in

magnitude to thesum of the effects he has on his partners. Thus A’s choice

is betweena , which benefits each of his partners by one unit anda, which

benefits himself two units. His conflict, then, is between retaining all the

benefit for himself or distributing it equally between his partners.

(Is it possible for the person to face a three-way conflict between

benefiting himself or one particular partner or the other? The answer is no

if we limit each person to two responses. Obviously, three responses are

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Figure 9.20

Constant-sum game based on FC-RC discordance.

needed in this case. This is one of several points at which moving from the

dyad to the triad without a corresponding increase in number of

responses creates peculiar constraints.)

Is it possible, in the constant-sum game in Figure 9.20, for A and B to

freeze out C or to impose an equal distribution of the rewards? The

answer to the first is no. They have no way of preventing C from having at

least his share of the available rewards. The second problem is trivial for

the same reason, that each person can be assured at least an equal share,

simply by following his RC in the resultant matrix (which results in

everyone keeping his two units at a,b,c,).

A third kind of triadic constant-sum game is based strictly on FC

components— 4FC 3, 4FCc, BFC 4, BFCc, CFC 4, and CFC ,. If each person’s

FCs are discordant, the result is the relationship shown in Figure 9.21.

Each person has a choice of partner to benefit. Thus three units of benefit

are available for distribution, except that a person may not receive the one

for which he himself is responsible. It is obvious that this type of

constant-sum game is unique to the triad in relation to the dyad. In the

dyad, conflict of interest can occur only between the person and his

partner. In the triad, as in this case, there is also a possible conflict

between the two partners, reflected in the person’s uncertainty about

which one to help and in their competition for his assistance.

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

Figure 9.21

Constant-sum game based on discordant FC’s.

It can be seen in Figure 9.21 that by benefiting each other (e.g., A andB

exchange a, and b,) any pair can freeze out the third. The excluded

person’s only leverage is to distribute his benefit unevenly between the

two and thereby attempt to induce the disadvantaged person to reciprocate as the price for receiving help. Associated with a dyad’s ability to

freeze out the third person is their power to impose a 1:1:1 division. Thus

A andB

can force C to accept such a division as the price for including him

at all.

OUTCOME CORRESPONDENCE AND COGNITIVE BALANCE

IN THE TRIAD

One meaning of certain kinds of interdependence is that a given person’s

rewards depend on the matching of behavior between two persons. Thus

in ,BC, B’s outcomes depend on the matches made between his and A’s

actions. If the sign of the BC term is positive, he will get a reward if the

actions are matched (@,), or ab.) or, if the sign is negative, he will get a

reward if they are not matched (@,b, or a,b.). Similarly, in ,cFC;, if the

term is positive, B will get a reward if A’s and C’s actions match, but if it is

negative B will get a reward if they do not match.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

One prime example to which the notion of matching or not matching

applies is that of opinion expression. In certain contexts a person finds it

rewarding to express the same opinion as another person—to match

opinions with him, so to speak. In other contexts a person finds it

rewarding to express disagreement with another. Viewing matching and

not matching in this light, the question which sets of personal preferences

regarding agreement and disagreement can be satisfied within the triad

naturally arises. Is it possible for all three persons to satisfy such preferences at the same time? If so, for what sets of preferences is this

possible? In other words, what preferences are compatible in the sense of

generating an outcome matrix of high correspondence?

It will be clear that in the dyad only two sets of matching preferences

generate correspondence: either both A and B must prefer agreement or

both must prefer disagreement. A cannot satisfy his preference for matching at the same time that B satisfies his for not matching. Such preferences

underlie noncorrespondent MBC.

It is readily shown that in the triad only two patterns of preferences can

generate correspondence: either matching must be preferred in all three

dyads or it must be preferred in one dyad but not in the other two. This is

true, whether the matching refers (a) to BC terms (between the person

and one of his partners), (b) to joint-FC terms (between the two partners

of the person), or (c) to both. The proof of this statement is found in the

possible patterns of actions in the 2 x 2 x 2 matrix. Two patterns, a,b,c,

and a,c», yield matching in each pair of persons. These patterns clearly

make it possible for each person to satisfy preferences for agreement with

each of his partners (the BC terms) and a preference for agreement between

his partners (the joint-FC term). The remaining six possible patterns

constitute three pairs of mirror-image patterns (e.g., a,b,c. and ayb.Cc,),

each of which yields matching in one pair of persons but not-matching in

the other two pairs; for example, a,b,c, and ayb,c, yield matching between

A and B but not-matching between A and C and between B and C. These

patterns make it possible for one person (C in the example) to satisfy (1)

his preferences for disagreement with each other person and (2) his

preference for agreement between the two others, and for each of the other

persons (A andB

in the example) to satisfy (1) their respective preferences

for agreement with one another and for disagreement with the first person

and (2) their respective preferences for disagreement between the two

others. In each case the first preferences correspond to the BC terms and

the second preferences, to the joint-FC terms. The reverse side of the coin

is that no response pattern permits two persons to satisfy their preferences for matching and, at the same time, the third person to satisfy his

preference for not matching. Similarly, no response pattern permits three

INTERDEPENDENCE IN TRIADS

persons, each of whom prefers not matching, to be satisfied simultaneously.

We observe here a close equivalence between the conditions necessary

for correspondence of outcomes and the requirements of cognitive balance (Heider, 1958). The sets of preferences that make possible correspondence of outcomes are also those that are in balance. At the dyadic

level each person must want the same relation to exist between the two,

either match or not-match. This corresponds to the balance rule for dyads

that two positive or two negative relations are in balance. At the triadic

level each person’s preferences regarding his relations with each of the

others must be consistent in a balance sense with his preference about the

relation between them. If he wants to match each of them, he must also

want them to match each other (the rule for the triad that three positive

relations are in balance). On the other hand, if he wants not to match

either of them, he must want them to match each other, or, if he wants to

match one but not the other, he must want them not to match each other

(the rule for the triad that one positive and two negative relations are in

balance).

This equivalence between outcome correspondence and cognitive balance is provocative of speculation. At a descriptive level it means that the

correspondent patterns are those that also permit each person to attain

cognitive balance. Absence of interpersonal conflict is concurrent with

lack of the intrapersonal tension associated with imbalance. Thus the

three persons are not only not in conflict among themselves about which

set of outcomes to attain, as they would be with noncorrespondent

outcomes, but each of them is able to have a balanced view of the triad

(and veridically so). Of course, the lack of conflict about outcomes need

not mean a lack of opinion conflict. One of the correspondent (and

balanced) patterns is that in which two persons agree with each other and

disagree with the third. However, the correspondence means that even in

this pattern the “need” of each for a consistent set of relations—his need

for balance—is satisfied.

At a causal and more speculative level one wonders whether outcome

correspondence may not constitute one of the antecedents of the preference for balanced interpersonal relations. If such relations are characterized by low conflict (at least in terms of outcomes), they may become

intuitively recognized as such and subjectively valued. In the light of this

analysis the individual’s desire for triadic balance may reflect a sense of

the interpersonal compatability of certain sets of preferences for matching

and not-matching.

We must hasten to add an important caveat to these observations. The

argument above applies only to the 2 x 2 and2 x2 x2 interdependence

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

patterns. With more alternative behaviors, there are many ways for

persons not to match and it obviously becomes possible for all three

persons to satisfy their respective desires simultaneously not to match

each other. In other words, the equivalence between outcome correspondence and cognitive balance obtains only in a polarized, twovalued world; for example, when every action is either pro or con with

respect to some central social issue. How frequently and extensively the

real world has this property we leave for the reader to judge.

Negotiation and

Coalition

Formation

A Model of Independent and Joint Action in the Dyad, 282

Identifying the IA and Th Pairs, 284

Classification of Possible Outcomes, 285

Reconsideration of the Th Pair, 288

Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship, 289

Negotiation, 292

The Comparison Level for Alternatives as a Bargaining Position ,296

Some Qualifications, 299

A Model of Action in the Triad: Coalition Formation, 301

Identifying the IA, Th, CoA, and CoTh Triplets, 302

Classification of Triplets on the Frontier, 306

Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship, 307

Triad Action without Coalition, 308

Triad Action with Coalition ,309

H's ay a

iwe wAdg

Rd :

reek

pee feet

oc oe

: vw row, vise

a8)

‘vel,

Sete

bas soistogey

ca cs

a see BR

“ff outed

ae olts frE€ p?

ONE ON

Mal Be

heahnvoptetle

09 Al PRs

preg hae

0 eu

ay:

te a —- en

Ae ae

Sls nldenag9 4 ies ie con

a54,

om entietein re GC ikigl

Fe p

/omapr wus ges

‘ en ‘ini tits :

ABSTRACT

This chapter first presents a model of independent and joint action in the dyad that

identifies the framework within which negotiation between the members can

occur. This framework consists of the various bargaining positions that may be

available to the two persons and the settlement points that are viable in relation to

the bargaining positions. A distinction is made between two types of bargaining

position: (a) those created by each person simply pursuing his own interests and

(b) those created explicitly, as threats, for the purpose of imposing on the other

person a settlement favorable to the bargainer. The model is then extended to the

triad where it forms the basis for an analysis of coalition formation—an analysis of

which pair of the three persons, if any, will act in concert against the third. The

basis for coalition formation exists in the mutual benefits to the coalition members

of working together to create bargaining positions of the two types noted. The

possibilities of coalition action are shown to increase the number of possible process

and outcome patterns in the triad as compared with the dyad.

This chapter describes a model of action in the dyad and then generalizes

the model to the triad. The latter enables us to examine the conditions

underlying the formation of coalitions within the triad and the negotiations involved in the formation process. Here we do more systematically

what we have done impressionistically throughout this book; that is,

speculate about the end state of interaction in various interdependence

relations (what the dyad or triad finally agrees, tacitly or explicitly, to do)

and how they reach that end state (by threat, going their separate ways,

negotiation, and so on).

We have considered interaction process at various other places in this

book from a variety of perspectives. In the analysis of transformations we

dealt with the evocation of outcome transformations, the transposition

effects of preemption, and turn-taking sequential transformations. In

Chapter 8 we dealt with the information processes by which interdependent persons make inferences about the given matrix and about how

each other is transforming it. In this final chapter we adopt still another

perspective on interaction process. We begin with the transformed or

effective matrix and assume that the persons have good information about

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

it. In other words, the problems of inferring the given matrix and the

transformations have been solved. Each person knows what the effective

values are for both persons in each possible outcome of their relationship.

In the most interesting cases to be considered there still remains some

degree of outcome noncorrespondence, and consequently there is room

for further prosocial transformations of the matrix. In these cases the

interaction includes appeals for further correspondence-heightening

transformation. The values and rules that are sometimes elicited before

interaction and that cause a person to treat the relationship as more

correspondent than it is given are appealed to here as ways of settling the

remaining conflict of interest. These prominently include proposals for

sequential turn taking and pleas for justice (some variant of the min diff

criterion). The conflictual aspects of the effective matrix also stimulate the

use of egoistic criteria in devising means of settling the issues in favor of

one’s self. Chief among these is the max rel criterion as

a means of

identifying an effective threat action to use against one’s partner. In

addition to assuming that the participants have good information about

the effective form of their interdependence, we assume that they have

good control over the moment-to-moment temporal course of their

interaction. Preemption is ruled out by assuming high alertness and equal

motility of action. Neither person can plan on catching the other off guard

in an undefended position. If one chooses to exercise his best threat

action, the other one is assumed to be able to exercise his best defense or

counteraction against it.

The above assumptions are, of course, unrealistic. Attribution about

given values and transformations often occurs during negotiation and not

before it. The transformation process is rarely complete before negotiation begins, and bargaining appeals and proposals are not simply routes

to settlement but have an impact on the effective matrix itself. Alertness

and motility are rarely equal between two persons; therefore one may act

(or attempt to act) without the other being prepared. For a more realistic

view of interaction process in all its complexity the reader will have to

assemble the implications of our various analyses as they bear on a given

pattern of interdependence, much as we have done, informally, in

describing probable scenarios for various matrices.

A MODEL OF INDEPENDENT AND JOINT

ACTION IN THE DYAD

Before considering coalitions in the triad it is necessary to specify the

conditions for independent or joint action in the dyad. The essential

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

elements of coalition formation are present in the dyad when the pair of

persons agree to work together ‘against the game,” so to speak.

In the pursuit of their best outcomes the members of a dyad may act in

one of three ways:

1. Independent action, in which each person acts on his own, perhaps

taking account of what his partner (acting in the same manner) is

likely to do, to get the best outcomes he can.

2. Cooperative joint action, in which the two persons act in an agreed-on,

coordinated manner, in the interest of providing each one with better

outcomes than are available by individual action. (Value transformations serve the important purpose of facilitating such agreements, obviating the need for extensive analysis and negotation. Thus

the agreement may be tacit rather than explicit.)

3. Imposed joint action, in which the two persons act in an agreed-on,

coordinated manner in the interest of preventing one of them from

creating poorer outcomes for both, although particularly for the

partner. The agreement here is imposed by the one person’s wielding

his threat power and consequently is usually explicit.

Which type of action occurs in the dyad (which is analogous to the

question of which coalition, if any, will occur in the triad) depends upon

the pairs of outcomes in the matrix and the way they are controlled by the

two persons. For any given matrix, it is possible informally to anticipate

how the interaction is likely to go and its probable conclusion. We now

present a more systematic way of stating these expectations. This model

is not presented as descriptive of behavior in the dyad. Nor is it a

prescription of how the pair ought to behave. Rather, it is analytical of

the possibilities, requirements, and constraints inherent to the interdependence matrix and suggestive of a scenario of the interaction that

each person would find plausible. Thatis to say, the scenario takes account

of the possible bases for action that the matrix provides for the pair and

that they may present to each other. In short, this is a logical, coherent

statement of the bases for action in interdependence relationships.

Our model entails a three-step analysis in which (a) two pivotal pairs of

outcomes in the relationship are identified, (b) the remaining pairs of

outcomes likely to come under consideration are classified in relation to

the two crucial pairs, (c) each person’s preferences for the pairs in (b) are

examined to predict the probable outcome of the relationship; for example, whether it will result in independent action, cooperative joint

action, or imposed joint action. By referring the predictions in (c) back to

the matrix, it can be determined what specific form the action will take.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Identifying the IA and Th Pairs

Our model assumes that decisions are made in relation to two critical

pairs of outcomes in the matrix, the independent action pair (IA) and the

threat pair (Th). It is these two pairs that (in some instances) afford

bargaining positions for the two persons and that (in all instances) give

relationship-specific psychological meaning to their actions.

IA Pair.

This is the pair of outcomes that A and B will get through their

best “independent” actions as each one tries to maximize his own outcomes (follows amax own criterion). Each is assumed to follow his own RC

or, lacking strong (dominant) RC, to take account of the other person’s

likely action (per the other person’s RC) and to act accordingly (per own

BC). In the absence of these conditions one or both are uncertain what the

outcomes will be, so the pair of values is calculated on the basis of

uncoordinated random action; for example, if there is uncertainty for both

persons, as with pure MBC ina 2 X 2 matrix, the pair of values is simply

GM, and GMg. In a larger matrix, if there is some section of the matrix

through which the “If 1.

., then he.

. .” reasoning cycles (i.e., there is

no ‘‘saddlepoint’’), then IA is calculated by averaging each person’s

outcomes over that section of the matrix.

In brief, the IA pair defines what each person can gain from the

relationship if he goes his independent way, merely taking account of

what the other is likely to do in his independent action.

ThPair.

The threat pair of values results from each person’s best attempt

unilaterally to establish a threat position from which to make demands for

the good outcomes available in the relationship. As in the case of IA, the

point is established by a person only in the face of his partner’s similar

efforts. Thus the Th pair represents both the best threat for A and his best

defense against B’s effort to establish a threat position.

The type of pair that can best serve A’s purposes as.a

basis for threat

depends on the particular distribution of the good outcomes or the

‘frontier’ points. In general, however, it is a pair of points in which the

difference (A-B) is maximized. [The term (A-B) refers to B’s outcome

subtracted from A’s.] Generally, the Th pair of a matrix can be identified

by examining the matrix of (A-B) values (cf. Figure 5.6) and then assuming that A will do his best unilaterally to maximize this value while B will

do his best to minimize it, that is, to maximize (B—A). Each is assumed to

take account of the other’s efforts and to do the best he can in the light of

what the other can be expected to do. (Our assumptions here amount to

treating the pair as playing a constant-sum game. The Th pair is equiNEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

valent to the equilibrium pair of values, defined in one of the ways

summarized in the discussion of Figure 6.14.)

We consider below the exceptions to the max rel rule as a basis for

identifying the best Th pair, but meantime the reader will appreciate the

general usefulness of the rule. To consider the matter from A’s point of

view the ideal Th pair is one in which (A-B) is large and positive. This

enables A to threaten unilaterally to move the pair to a point in the

relationship at which, even though his own outcome will be low, B’s will

be much lower. The value of such threat, of course, is to exert pressure on

B to grant concessions to A in order to avoid the low outcomes.

The Th pair may be the same as the IA pair. If so, it is regarded as

nonexistent. (It would be meaningless for a person to threaten his partner

with outcomes they can get by independent action.) By its definition the

Th pair cannot yield either person higher outcomes than the IA pair. If any pair

selected by the threat criterion were to yield higher outcomes for either

person than the (tentatively defined) IA pair, the Th pair would become

the IA pair. The point is that as A and B attempt to maximize the

difference to their own respective advantages neither can attain higher

outcomes than he attains when each attempts merely to maximize his

own outcomes. However, one or both (usually both) may attain lower

outcomes in the pursuit of max rel.

Classification of Possible Outcomes

All possible pairs of outcomes in the matrix can be classified with respect

to the bargaining positions defined by the IA and Th pairs. By ‘‘all

possible pairs” we refer not only to those specified in the matrix but also

to others produced by trade offs between the cells of the matrix; for

example, a particular 2 x 2 matrix may have only the following four pairs

of outcomes: (0,0), (10,0), (0,0), and (0,10). By coordinated trade offs

between the second and fourth pairs other pairs of outcomes are possible;

for example, (5,5), (6,4), and (2,8).

The classification of all possible pairs is shown in Figure 10.1. First,

there may be Reward pairs in which both|persons have higher outcomes

than in the IA pair. These are the ton

that the dyad can obtain by

cooperative joint action. The action required is joint because some type of

agreement is necessary to attain the outcomes. (Remember, IA is the best

they can do without such agreement.) The action may be considered

cooperative because A and B must work together with the common

purpose of giving each person more than he can get if he acts independently. If there are no Rew pairs, A and B can do no better by

agreement than by independent action.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Second, there may be B-complies (B-comp) pairs, in which B gets less

than his outcome in IA but more than in Th, and A gets more than in IA. If

there are such pairs, they include the outcomes to which A might hope to

gain B’s compliance by using his threat over B (hence the label B-complies);

that is, by threatening B to take the dyad to the Th pair A can put pressure

on B to accept something less good for him than IA but better than Th

(and, of course, better for A than [A—the basis of A’s interest in making

the threat). The B-complies pairs can be attained only by agreement but it is

an agreement imposed on B by A; hence these outcomes represent

imposed joint action.

B's outcomes

Figure 10.1

Classification of pairs of outcomes in relation to the IA and Th pairs.

Third, there may be A-complies (A-comp) pairs, defined for A in the same

way as the B-complies pairs are defined for B, that is, better for A than Th

but less good than IA and better for B than IA. B might hope to gain A’s

acquiescence to one of these pairs.

Finally, the remaining pairs may be dismissed from consideration as

being not viable, that is, as having no basis for their bilateral acceptability.

These pairs are either below the Th level for one person (why should he

agree to accept less than the worst his partner can do to him?) or below

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

IA for both persons (why should they agree to a set of outcomes that both

can exceed at [A?).

In fact, the notion of not viable pairs can be extended to include all pairs

not on the frontier of the plot of pairs of outcomes. This is simply a way of

precluding from consideration any pair of outcomes with respect to

which another pair is better for both persons. In practice, this amounts to

the assumption that the two persons have good information and use it

carefully and skillfully. [With incomplete information, careless negotiation, and a complex bargaining task interdependent persons often fail to

identify and agree on the frontier points (Kelley and Schenitzki, 1972;

Pruitt and Lewis, 1975). | Thus in Figure 10.2 the nine large circles indicate

the pairs of outcomes in a particular 3 x 3 relationship. As noted in

Chapter 6, all possible trade offs among the cells in this relationship will

yield pairs of outcomes that fall within the crosshatched convex polygon.

B-—comp

High

Figure 10.2

Classification of pairs of outcomes on the frontier.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Among them we consider only those denoted by solid circles; that is,

those on the frontier of the polygon; and it is only the frontier pairs that

we classify as Rew, A-comp, B-comp, not viable, or (see below) IA.

From the definition of the IA pair it will be noted that there may be no

Rew pairs: the IA may be on the frontier itself, in which case it is given a

special classification among the frontier points. Similarly, there may be

no compliance pairs. The Th pair may equal IA, hence define no Comp

pairs (and in that sense be nonexistent), or, evenif This different fromIA,

there may be no outcomes on the frontier that satisfy the Comp criteria. If

there are Comp pairs, the numbers of A-comp and B-comp pairs may differ

greatly. If Th maximally favors A (his outcome there equals his outcome at

IA), there will be no A-comp pairs and many B-comp pairs.

The relative locations of the several kinds of pairs will make it clear why

we use the term compliance to describe some of them. Because a compliance set does not include any of the elements of the IA or Rew sets, the

person forced to take a Comp pair is in a sense acting in a nonvoluntary

way, unwillingly submitting to the partner’s threat. He is required to

accept lower outcomes than he might otherwise attain as through independent action or joint cooperative action. (In fact, the threatened person

would be better off if no communication or agreement were possible! The

IA is what two rational players might expect to get, on the average, with

one-shot, no communication play.) The IA and the Th levels are somewhat similar in their psychological significance to the CL and CL,

respectively. Thus the IA defines a level of outcomes the person might

minimally expect from the interaction, and the Th defines a level he will

be forced to take if the partner acts to disrupt the relationship. Consequently the compliance set outcomes are analogous to those obtained in

a nonvoluntary relationship, being below CL but above CL,), (Thibaut

and Kelley, 1959). (The IA and Th pairs are discussed in relation to the

CL, on p. 296.)

Reconsideration of the Th pair

We have already noted that although identifying the Th pair by the max rel

rule is generally appropriate there are exceptions. The max rel criterion

always yields the pair that gives the bargainer the most favorable position

from which to make an equity claim. Thus the larger the value (B—A) fora

particular pair of outcomes, the more favorable to B the frontier pair that

comes closest to yielding him and A equal increments above that pair. The

location of the Th pair, however, not only affects the location of an

equitable outcome but also extends or curtails the two compliance sets.

This effect of the threat pair is dependent not only on the value of (B-A)

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

but also on the value of (B +A). Sometimes the effect is large enough thata

point less favorable on the (B—A) criterion will be preferred by B to one

that is more favorable. The two cases are illustrated in Figure 10.3. In both

cases diagonal lines indicating successive levels of (B—A) have been drawn

to permit easy comparison of different Th pairs. By the max rel criterion

person B prefers points located farthest toward the lower right portion of

the plot. Thus by this criterion he would prefer T to T’ in both cases in

Figure 10.3. In Case I, however, T’ extends the A-comp set in a direction

favorable to B and in Case II T’ curtails the B-comp set in a direction

favorable to him. In both cases the T’ pairs seem to provide B witha

better

bargaining position. Thus, if the matrices were such that he could impose

either T or T’ on the dyad, the T’ pair would be the better one.

The implication of these cases for our simulation of the interaction is

that the Th point should be identified after the frontier points have been

identified. The optimal threat point is the one that results when each

person seeks a way in which unilaterally he can establish a favorable max

rel position and either reduce the size of his own compliance set or

increase the size of his partner’s.

Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship

Once the viable points on the frontier have been identified and classified

as IA or Rew, A-comp, and B-comp they are listed according to each

person’s preferences. The process of reaching agreement on some mode

of action or trade off can then be thought of as one in which each person

moves down his preference ordering until they come to the same outcome pair and this forms the basis for agreement. In A’s preference

ordering B-comp pairs, if any exist, will come first, followed by either the

IA or Rew pairs. A-comp pairs will be at the bottom of the list. B’s preference ordering will have

acomplementary structure, with A-comp pairs,

if any exist, heading the list.

In the simplest cases the IA pair or the same Rew pair will be at the top of

the two persons’ preference orders and they can agree—either to leave

each other alone and go their respective independent ways or to take joint

action to attain the Rew pair. These two cases are illustrated in Figure 10.4

by correspondent MBC and MDG, respectively. In the more complex and

common cases one or both will have Comp pairs as their first preferences

and negotiation will ensue (see Chicken in Figure 10.4). Similarly, even

when there are no Comp pairs, if there are multiple Rew pairs negotiation

will be necessary to reach agreement on one of them (see PDG in Figure

10.4). When the negotiation includes Comp pairs, there is the possibility of

imposed joint action; that is, of settlement on a pair that puts one person

Y/ /

aa _—

High

igure 10 -3

Optimal threat pairs for person B.

Analysis of four patterns in terms of settlement points.

Figure 10.4

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

below his IA level. This is particularly likely when the Comp sets are

asymmetrical in relation to IA, as in Case I of Figure 10.3, in which A is

likely to have to agree to a trade off that will put him below IA.

At this point we have made rough predictions about the course of the

relationship. Depending on what each person finds at the top of his

preference ordering of the frontier pairs of outcomes, each may act

independently, jointly pursue a Rew point, or negotiate. Many relationships will require the last because the first preferences will not be

compatible. Therefore, although we cannot make further clear predictions about the course of affairs, we must consider the process of

negotiation. How is it that a person gives up his attempt to gain his

preferred outcomes and looks further down in his preference order?

What appeals does he make to and receive from his partner? What order is

there to the process of finding a reasonable basis for agreement when the

interests of the two persons, at least as among the frontier points, are in

direct opposition? To these questions we now turn.

Negotiation

In general, negotiation involves two interdependent persons who are

seeking an agreement that will make them both better off than at their

respective bargaining positions. Figure 10.5 is a simple case. This is the

situation we have described in which the two persons bargain over the

values in the Rew set. In the absence of a Th pair, the IA pair of outcomes

defines their respective bargaining positions. Three pairs of outcomes

from the matrix are found in the Rew set, but inasmuch as there is the

possibility of arranging a trade off between two or more of them only the

most profitable (i.e., only the frontier pairs) are shown in the figure.

Among the frontier pairs there is no mutual basis for selecting one rather

than another. At this point our model of the process must become

nonspecific, as we move from reasons for action that havea logical appeal

for both persons to reasons that, although not without force, are more

debatable and therefore less compelling. The former are epitomized by

the argument that ‘We'll both be better off if

.. .’” and the latter by “We'll

come out with equal gainsif.

. .” The latter are the arguments of equality and equity. What force they have comes from the important fact that

some agreement is to be preferred by both persons. Because in that basic

sense both are in the same boat, the costs of nonagreement (it can be

argued) should fall equally on both, and, conversely, the profits from

agreement should be equally shared by both. Thus in Figure 10.5,

although A Prefers agreements close to x and B prefers those close to y,

the equality argument can be made for one close to the 50:50 line.

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

High

Zero

Zero

High

Figure 10.5

Negotiation diagram with bargaining among members of the Rew set.

Matters are rarely as simple as shown in Figure 10.5. Usually there are

multiple baselines from which the bargaining occurs (Figure 10.6). In Case

I the JA pair itself does not yield equal outcomes for A and B and two

different equality arguments can be made, one with respect to the absolute values of any pair (to be referred to as an equality argument) and the

other with respect to the two persons’ gains in relation to the IA pair (to be

referred to as anequity argument). The latter type of argument asserts that

ina sense the IA pair represents the true zero point of the relationship, for

it specifies what each person can generate ‘for himself,”” so to speak, in

the absence of joint action. (In equity theory terms it represents his value,

investments, and resources.) The argument continues that even though

one person is better off than the other at IA he deserves to be so and

accordingly deserves a similar advantage in the eventual agreement. It

can be seen that in Case I in Figure 10.6 A will make this equity argument

and B will make the equality argument. At this point our model has made

its predictions about the process and must leave some uncertainty about

the outcome. In general, of course, we might expect the final agreement

to be some compromise between those indicated by the two arguments.

The most complex negotiation situation is shown in Case II in Figure

10.6. Here, in addition to the equity argument based on JA, A can

introduce an equity argument based on the Th pair. His assertion is that

High

Zero

High

Case II

High

Zero

Zero

High

Figure 10.6

Negotiation diagrams with multiple baselines.

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

the Th pair defines the real baseline for each person in that he can ensure

that they will get no more than their outcomes there. It will be clear from

the figure that the force of this argument depends on how much A’s

outcomes in the Th pair surpass B’s; that is, the amount A stands to gain

from this equity consideration depends on how usable the Th pair is for A.

Figure 10.7 shows the effect of the Th pair in a situation in which IA is on

the frontier. From this example it is apparent that the threat-based equity

argument may suffice to induce B to agree to an outcome below IA.

High

Zero

High

Figure 10.7

Negotiation diagram with bargaining between IA pair and B-Comp set.

Although the Th pair may afford a basis for one person’s equity arguments, it would be wrong to conclude that these arguments have the

same meaning and persuasiveness as those based on IA. In the one case

([A-based arguments) the assertion is “I deserve such and such because

of what we would get if we go our individual ways.” In the other case

(Th-based arguments), the argument is “I deserve such and such because

of what we would get if I impose the threat outcomes on us.” There is

clearly a difference in the implied locus of causation for the nonagreement

outcomes, the former stemming from the structure of the relationship

and the latter from the willful intervention of one person. The import of

this difference is uncertain, but in general we might expect Th-based

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

equity arguments to have less effect on the agreement because of the

resistance they are likely to arouse by their implication that the relationship is subject to unilateral definition. Yet the difference is one of

degree. It is, after all, the structure of the relationship that provides one

person with the means for threatening the other. The difference is between (a) acting ina rather direct ends-oriented way (as in asserting one’s

intention to pursue the IA in the absence of agreement) and (b) acting in

an indirect means-oriented way (as in asserting one’s intention to impose

the Th pair in the absence of a certain type of agreement).

Certainly one major exception to the generalization that a Th-based

equity argument has less persuasiveness than one that is [A-based occurs

when the Th-based argument coincides with (or is close to) the equality

argument. This is illustrated by the version of the Threat game shown in

Figure 10.8. The Th pair is useful for B, for the (A-B) difference in

outcomes is smaller than in the IA pair. It therefore becomes a basis for

negotiating a trade off between the IA pair and the single member of the

A-comp set. Because the Th pair is at (0,0), its derivative equity argument

coincides with an argument for equality of outcomes.

If the Th pair yields the same difference between A’s and B’s outcomes

as the IA pair, it may provide no different basis for agreement than the IA

pair. We may say that no usable threat exists for either person in such a

case. Yet, if the Th point is different from the IA pair, it affords an

additional argument for reaching some agreement; that is, it can be used

by either person to press for agreement. We might expect the I[A-based

equity argument to carry more weight in this case.

The Comparison Level for Alternatives as a Bargaining Position

As noted in Chapter 3, the matrix may be used to represent the consequences of each person’s being “in” or “out” of the dyadic relationship.

Thibaut and Kelley (1959) defined the person’s CL,), as the lowest level of

outcomes the person will accept in the light of his/her available alternative opportunities and relationships. The person’s CL, thus constitutes a potential bargaining position from which to negotiate outcomes

within the given relationship. We can now see that, depending on the

circumstances, the CL,,, may correspond to an IA or a Th pair. The two

possibilities are shown in Figure 10.9. Each person is shown to have two

behavioral choices within the relationship (@ ,anda for A and b, and b, for

B). The consequences of one or both person’s leaving the relationship are

shown in terms of the values of their respective CL,),s. (This glosses over a

problem mentioned on p. 72.) In Case I, with independent action, B

chooses b,, and taking account of B’s choice A chooses his CL,),. Thus the

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

Figure 10.8

Matrix and negotiation diagram for the threat game.

CL,;, values (8 for A and 4 for B) constitute the IA pair. As shown in the

bargaining space at the right, the IA affords a bargaining position from

which it is reasonable for the two persons to negotiate some turn-taking

arrangement between the a2, and ab, cells within the relationship.

By contrast, in Case II in Figure 10.9 the CL,), values constitute a Th

point. The IA pair (7,6) results from B’s independent preference forb, and

A’s similar preference fora. In generating a threat point, A takes his CL,),

[ this maximizes (A-B) in the face of B’s choice of

b, as a way of minimizing

(A-B). ]The Th point provided by the CL,), values favors A and affords a

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Case II

Chai

Figure 10.9

The CL,,, as IA (Case I) and as Th (Case II).

basis for negotiating some trade off between the IA value and A’s most

preferred outcome (11,3 at a,b,).

The point of these examples is that the CL,,, may have different meanings as a bargaining position, corresponding to the different meanings of

the IA and Th pairs. The examples show that its meaning depends on

how the two CL,),$ compare with the outcomes to be obtained within the

relationship and with one another. When the CL,), values are known only

to the persons to whom they apply, as is commonly the case in bargaining

relationships, their potential significance as IA versus Th points creates a

source of ambiguity and misundertanding for the interaction. A person

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

for whom the CL,), provides an IA bargaining position may be viewed by

the partner as using the alternatives as a threat and therefore as exerting

undue pressure to gain a favorable agreement.

Some Qualifications

The preceding discussion has assumed that equity arguments are used to

lay claim to outcomes that afford the two persons equal increments above

the bargaining points, whether IA or Th. It must be noted that a different

argument can be made, notably one that the ratio of outcomes at the

bargaining point should be maintained at the settlement point. The

implication of an equal ratio argument is shown in Figure 10.10 for the

situation in Case I of Figure 10.6. Because the ratio of outcomes at IA

favors A over B, the equal ratio argument favors him even more than the

equal increment argument and the gap between the equity and the

equality positions is widened. The equal ratio argument can be made only

when there are meaningful zero points for the outcome scales, and is

probably more likely to be invoked when ratio scales such as time,

money, and weight are involved, and when they are commensurable

between A and B.

High

Zero

Zero

High

Figure 10.10

Equal-ratio equity argument for Case I in Figure 10.6.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Earlier we distinguished cooperative joint action from imposed joint

action. It must now be admitted that there is no sharp dividing line

between these categories. As the agreement within the Rew set moves

closer to the IA level for one person, the agreement becomes to a degree

imposed on that person. Similarly, as the agreement within the B-comp

set approaches the IA level, it probably seems less a matter of compulsory

agreement and takes on some of the qualities of a mutually cooperative

action.

How do these equality arguments relate to value transformations?

First, they are operative in relation to outcomes in the effective matrix, that

is, in relation to outcomes that may already have been subjected to some

transformation. Second, they are arguments directed toward producing a

basis for agreement. As such they may introduce further prosocial transformation, but their primary function is that of facilitating agreement. The

two phenomena are closely related because they derive their existence

from the same facts of interdependence.

In concluding this description of a model of action for the dyad, it

should be noted that involved here is a logical and analytical structure

that is independent of the matrix analysis. The model begins with the

definition of pivotal pairs of outcomes, the bargaining positions, and uses

them to classify the frontier pairs in terms of possible settlement points.

These pairs are then ranked according to each person’s preferences and

the two rank orders are examined for what they make probable in terms of

negotiation, action, and so on. The latter implications can be translated

readily back into matrix terms; for example, pairs of actions or coordinated trade offs between two pairs of actions. However, the intervening logic of the model, which consists of classification, rank orders,

and implications, can be applied to sets of outcomes derived from any

form of description of interdependence and does not require the matrix.

Although the matrix analysis of interdependence is not essential for the

model of action, it illustrates the central role that some conceptualization

of interdependence (outcome control) must play in linking the terms of

the model to specific behaviors in the relationship. The model requires

some way of specifying (a) the control over their individual and joint

outcomes the two persons can exercise independently and by joint action,

and (b) the bases for threat each can establish by unilateral control over,

for example, the magnitude of the difference between their outcomes.

The matrix provides a specification of both plausible bargaining positions

and of reasonable settlement points. It also determines the nature of the

joint action necessary to yield any agreed-on outcomes. It is not necessary

to spell out here all the links between the matrix and the model because

they have been implied in preceding sections of this book; for example, in

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

Chapter 5 on control over pair outcomes (the sum and difference scores)

and in Chapters 4 and 6 on the turn-taking patterns and ratios necessary

to yield certain allocations of outcomes between the two persons.

A MODEL OF ACTION IN THE TRIAD:

COALITION FORMATION

In Chapter 9 we saw some reasons A and B might have for coordinating

their actions in relation to C to induce him to act a certain way or to

prevent him from taking some action. We have also seen, in their types of

control over C, A’s and B’s means of exercising this influence. We now

consider these matters more generally by attempting to answer such

questions as the following: which pair of a triad, if any, will work in

concert in relation to the third? What is their purpose and what is the

nature of their concerted effort?

These questions concern the formation and actions of “coalitions,”’ the

term coalition meaning ‘‘an alliance for combined action of distinct.

persons.

. .”” (Oxford English Dictionary). The essential observation is

that two persons act in concert in relation to the third, usually against him.

The combined action reflects an understanding between the two, either

tacit or explicit, regarding some joint goal to be achieved and the means to

do so. There may eventually be an agreement between the coalition and

the third person, but there is always some difference between the

within-coalition understanding and the understanding between it and

the third person. A minimal difference is that the former precedes the

latter.

Our model of action in the triad is simply an expansion of that for the

dyad, except that we must take account of a new type of action, namely,

coalition action. This action consists of two persons behaving in concert in

relation to the third in regard for their special convergence of interest and

their common conflict with him. By coalition action a pair is often able to

establish special bargaining positions, analogous to the IA and Th pairs

but differing from those defined by independent individual effort in the

triad.

Figure 10.11 lists the possible types of viable outcome for the dyad and

for the triad, respectively. For each kind of relationship the types of possible bargaining position are listed on the left and the settlement points

associated with each bargaining position are listed on the right. (The

reader will recall that for the dyad the IA point may also be a plausible

settlement point, if it is on the frontier of the bargaining points. In the

triad the same is true for IA and the various CoA points.) The greater

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

number of possible bargaining positions and settlement points for the

triad compared with the dyad reflects the greater number of different

structural relations and dynamic processes possible in the triad. We shall

now explain these various possibilities.

Identifying the IA, Th, CoA, and CoTh Triplets

Because each cell in the triadic relationship is specified by a triplet of

outcomes, our first task is to define the various crucial triplets for the

relationship. The IA and Th triplets are defined in the same way as the IA

and Th pairs for the dyad except that they result from the pursuit by all

three persons of their individual purposes. The IA triplet lists their respective outcomes when each one acts independently to maximize his outcomes, although taking account of what each of the others, similarly

motivated, is likely to do. The Th triplet lists the outcomes resulting from

the efforts of each to create an optimal bargaining position for himself.

The same complications are here as for the dyad, but the Th triplet can be

approximated by assuming that each person will try to maximize the

difference between his own and the others’ combined outcomes.

In addition to these triplets, there is the possibility that analogous but

different triplets can be created by each pair of persons acting as a

coalition against a third. These are referred to as coalition action (CoA) and

coalition threat (CoTh) triplets. Each one that “‘exists’’ (that is different

from the analogous IA or Th triplet) is given a prefix to indicate the

particular pair of persons that create it. Thus the AB-CoA triplet listed in

Figure 10.11 specifies the outcomes of the three persons when A and B

work jointly to maximize their combined outcomes and when C, taking

account of their actions, does his best to maximize his. Similarly, the

BC-CotTh triplet describes what B andC can mobilize, by their joint effort,

in the way of a threat to gain compliance from A.

The important property of these bilaterally defined triplets is that they

can be better for both members of the particular coalition than the comparable unilaterally defined triplets but never worse. (If they are equivalent

to the comparable IA or Th triplet, we disregard them.) That they will

never be worse is easy to understand. Rather than generate positions that

are less beneficial for themselves, A and B can agree to act in the same way

they would act independently in generating the IA or Th triplets. That

these coalition triplets may be better than the IA and Th triplets follows

from the fact (illustrated in Chapter 9) that by joint action A and B can

delimit the interaction in different ways than would be possible if they

worked independently, and some of these ways may be to their mutual

advantage.

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

DYAD

TRIAD

Bargaining Positions

Settlement Points

Bargaining Positions

Settlement Points

Rew(IA)

A-comp

A-comp (Th)

B-comp

B-comp (Th)

C-comp(Th)

AB-comp(Th)

AC-comp (Th)

BC-comp(Th)

AB-CoA

Rew(AB-CoA)

AC-CoA

Rew(AC-CoA)

BC-CoA

Rew(BC-CoA)

AB-CoTh

C-comp(AB-CoTh)

AC-CoTh

B-comp(AC-CoTh)

BC-CoTh

A-comp(BC-CoTh)

Figure 10.11

Possible types of bargaining positions and their associated settlement

points in the dyad and triad.

Figure 10.12 shows two examples in which AB-CoA yields better outcomes than IA for both A and B. In the course of independent action

among the three persons in Example I, C follows his RC to choose c; and,

knowing this, A chooses ay. Given the likelihood of those two actions, B

follows his BC in the c, submatrix to choose by. These actions yield the

triplet (+4, +2, +5). In contrast, by coalition action, A and B can ensure

themselves the triplet (+6, +6, 0). In Example II the IA triplet (+2, +2,

+10) results if, anticipating that C will choose cz, A and B follow their

respective RC’s in thec, submatrix. By a coordinated trade off betweena,b,

anday,b, (assuming C stays atc.) they can attain a number of triplets such as

(+3, +9, +2) or (+6, +6, +2) which are better for both. This example

shows the important fact that unlike IA the AB-CoA set can include a

number of triplets rather than only one. More on this in a moment.

The example in Figure 10.13 shows how AB-CoTh can be more advantageous for A and B than the independently produced Th triplet. In their

independent attempts to define self-advantageous threat points A maximizes the value [A — (B + C)/2], B maximizes [B — (A + C)/2], and C

maximizes [C —(A +B)/2]. The last leads C to choose c , and in that half of

the matrix A chooses a, and B chooses b,. Acting as a coalition, A and B

work together to maximize [(A + B)/2 — C]. With this criterion, given C’s

choice of c, (he continues to maximize [C — (A + B)/2]), they agree to the

Example I

IA =

+4, Pa jorab Ag bp Cy

AB-CoA

+6, +6, 0 at ay b, Cy

Example II

+10

IA es +2, +2, +10 at a,b, Cy

AB-CoA = set of triplets resulting from alternation between 4, b; c and & by &.

Figure 10.12

Examples in which AB-CoA is better for both A and B than IA.

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

Th = (4, 6, 5) at a, be

AB-CoTh = (10, 0, —5) at a, b; c

Figure 10.13

Examplein which AB-Coth

is more advantageous to bothA andB

than Th.

a,b, pair. The resulting AB-CotTh triplet is more useful for them as a threat

than Th because their joint advantage over C is greater. By threatening to

enact thea,b, pair they are in a better position to induce C’s agreement toa

contract favorable to their joint interest. It will be noted that the possible

costs of the threat action are not borne equally by the members of the A-B

coalition. If they find it necessary to carry out the threat action, B will

suffer lower outcomes than A. This may be expected to affect differentially the two persons’ willingness to establish a coaliton in order to

threaten C.

Both CoA and CoTh sets may include more than one triplet of outcomes. This follows from the simple fact that any outcome or position

defined by agreement among two or more persons may, for certain matrices,

include a number of possible outcome triplets. This means that the

coalition members may have to negotiate between themselves the division of rewards available in the CoA set. Also, in their use of the CoTh set

as a bargaining baseline they may have to negotiate how the costs of the

threat action, if taken, are to be borne. This means that the coalition is

often working from a set of points in the negotiation space rather than a

single one and this has implications for possible conflict within the coalINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

ition and for its vulnerability to counter offers and threats from the third

person.

It will be clear from their definitions what the functions of the CoA and

CoTh triplets are. Like IA, in some cases the CoA set may be part of what

the persons negotiate about and in other cases, part of what they negotiate

from. If functional at all, the CoTh triplet, like its Th counterpart, always

plays the role of a position from which bargaining is conducted. Finally, it

should be noted that just as a Th triplet may not differ from the IA triplet,

so the AB-CoTh triplet may not differ from the AB-CoA triplet. From this

it will be realized that although every triad will have an IA triplet it may or

may not have a Th triplet and it may or may not have CoA triplets (i.e.,

different from the IA triplet). Given the existence of a Th triplet (different

from the IA triplet), any coalition may or may not have a CoTh triplet

(different both from the Th triplet and the appropriate CoA triplet).

Classification of Triplets on the Frontier

First, all the triplets of outcomes on the frontier can be classified with

respect to the IA and Th triplets. The reader can visualize the possibilities

here by imagining a three-dimensional version of Figure 10.1. The possible types of triplet that can be distinguished in relation to the IA and Th

triplets are shown in the upper portion of the right-most column of Figure

10.11. Depending on the relative locations of the triplets in the threedimensional space describing the outcomes of

A, B, andC and depending

on the location and extent of the frontier, there may be Rew(IA) triplets

(better than IA for all three persons), A-comp triplets (better than IA for B

and C but between IA and Th for A), B-comp and C-comp triplets, AB—comp

triplets (better than IA for C but between IA and Th for A and B), and

BC-comp and AC-comp triplets. The implication of the last type of compliance triplet is, of course, that the Th triplet may provide a basis for one

member of the triad to bring threat pressure to bear on both of the others.

It would be among the BC-comp triplets that A might attempt to gain B’s

and C’s compliance to his threat. There may be six different types of

compliance triplet because any one or pair of the triad can be below their

[A outcomes but above Th. All remaining points on the frontier, at which

one or more of the triad is below Th, are not viable. The person(s) below

Th would have no reason to enter into an agreement that would make any

of these points possible.

Second, as shown in Figure 10.11, the triplets on the frontier can also be

classified with respect to each pair of CoA and CoTh triplets. Triplets

better than AB-CoA for all three persons are labeled Rew(AB-CoA), those

better than AC-CoA for all three, Rew(AC-CoA), and those better than

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

BC-CoA for all three, Rew(BC-CoA).

Similarly,

triplets better than

AB-CoA for A and B but between AB-CoA and AB-CoTh for C will be

labeled C-comp (AB-CoTh) triplets. Logically, the same types of triplet

may be distinguished in relation to each pair of CoA and CoTh triplets as

are defined by the IA and Th triplets. Certain of the comp types, however,

do not make sense psychologically. Thus the B-comp (AB-CoTh) triplets

(in which A and C are above AB-CoA, but B is below AB-CoA, though

above AB-CoTh) are not viable because B cannot be expected to participate in creating the AB-CoTh point in order to induce his own compliance to sub-AB-CoA outcomes. Thus, as listed in Figure 10.11, the only

meaningful compliance triplets relative to actions of the A-Bcoalition are

the C-comp (AB-CoTh) triplets, the only ones relevant to the A-C coalition

are the B-comp (AC-CoTh) triplets, and the only ones relevant to the B-C

coalition are the A-comp (BC-CoTh) triplets. (Our notation is admittedly

cumbersome for the reason that we have tried to preserve a high level of

mnemonic value in the abbreviations. The reader will observe in Figure

10.11 that the notation for each settlement point includes a parenthetical

suffix that describes the bargaining position with respect to which the

settlement point is viable.)

The purpose of this second classification is, of course, to specify the

ways in which coalition action in the triad may affect the meaning and

control of the frontier points. A clear example of change in meaning

would be a triplet that is labeled both rew and AB-CoA. Without the

formation of a coalition, this triplet is accessible only by three-way

cooperative action. The second label, however, means that by their concerted effort A and B can provide the triplet themselves (assuming only

that C will not interfere with a threat).

In brief, each point on the frontier is potentially given four tags, one to

indicate its position in relation to each of the four sets of reference points.

If a given CoA or threat (Th or CoTh) triplet is missing, it, of course, does

not affect the classification and is reflected in none of the labels. A triplet

that is not viable with respect to a given set of reference points will simply

receive no label referring to that set, and triplets that have no labels (i.e.,

that are not viable from any perspective) are simply eliminated from

further consideration.

Predicting the Outcome of the Relationship

Again, once the frontier points have been tagged as described, they are

listed for each person from most to least preferred. In general, each

person’s list will have the same general structure; for example, person A’s

list will generally have C-comp (AB-CoTh), B-comp (AC-CoTh), BC-comp,

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

B-comp, and C-comp triplets as most preferred. Next in order will be

Rew(AB-CoA) and Rew(AC-CoA)

or AB-CoA and AC-COA triplets, followed closely by IA or Rew triplets. Least preferred will be triplets requiring his compliance such as A-comp (BC-CoTh) or AB-comp triplets.

The decision process by which the triad agrees on a pattern of action

can be thought of in terms of a series of concessions, with each person

moving down his preference order until an appropriate set of labels is

reached. This does not require agreement on the same triplet. One of the

‘“‘emergent’’ phenomena of the triad is that under certain conditions a pair

of persons can absolutely require the third to accept a nonpreferred

triplet, namely, a CoA triplet. As mentioned earlier, the greater variety of

possible events in the triad compared with the dyad is indicated by the

greater variety of types of triplet that may occur in each person’s preference list. The greater variety of means by which actions are decided on

is indicated by the greater array of triplets that may be used to define

minimal bargaining positions.

Triad Action Without Coalition

We consider first some of the possible situations in the triad that are

similar to those in the dyad. In all these cases there is no CoA triplet not

equal to the IA triplet and no CoTh triplet not equal to the Th triplet.

Consequently, joint action by the members of any potential coalition is

not relevant to the outcome. No pair can do any better for itself in the

context of two-versus-one action than any individual can in the threeway context, and no pair can create a more useful threat position by

concerted action than any individual can by independent action.

The simplest case is that in which there are also no Comp triplets, Th

being equal to IA. Under these conditions the three persons may act

independently and take the IA triplet (if it is on the frontier) or they may

act jointly to attain one of the Rew triplets. If there are several Rew triplets,

they will negotiate among them from the position of the IA triplet.

A somewhat more complex situation develops when there are comp

triplets. The negotiation then proceeds over the union of the sets of comp

triplets and either the IA or Rew triplets, each person making his claims

from the Th position and, if it is not on the frontier, the IA point. The

novel aspect of this situation in the triad is that the Th triplet may be

usable in several quite different ways, namely, (a) by one person against

the other two, (b) by two persons against the third, or (c) by one person

against the other two and by the second person against the third. A

simple example illustrates these possibilities. (It assumes no outcome

transformation, it must be noted. The values given are the effective ones.)

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

Three youngsters will be given $15 if they can agree on how to divide it

among themselves. If they cannot agree, each will be given $4 (IA =4, 4,

4). An additional rule specifies that any one of them can by unilateral

action (as by saying “I quit’’) cause them to receive a still different set of

outcomes. In Case I this Th triplet yields 0, 0, 0 for A, B, and C, respectively; in Case IL it yields 3, 0, 0; in Case IIL it yields 3, 3, 0; and in Case IV it

yields 4, 2, 0.

In Case I Th is no more usable by one boy than by another. Its presence

merely increases the importance of some agreement and of not aggravating any boy by pressing him to take a small share of the $15.

In Case II boy A stands to gain some advantage from using the threat

because he has the least to lose by quitting. He might make the Th-based

equity argument (an equal increment argument) that out of the $15 he

should receive his $3 first and then the remaining $12 can be divided

equally, yielding a 7, 4, 4 outcome (a triplet on the margin between the

reward set and the BC-comp set).

Similarly, Case III favors both boy A and boy B. Either one of them can

generate the Th triplet. If A suggests that it implies he should get a larger

share than one-third, B will very likely assert that the same principle

applies to his situation, and C becomes the one under pressure to move

away from an equality-based agreement. Simple equity would give3 each

to A and B and divide the remaining 9 among the three, for a 6, 6, 3

outcome, a member of the C-comp set. Case III must not be confused with

AB-CotTh, where A andB must work in concert to create the threat triplet.

Case III is simply an example in which the rules of the game favor both A

and B as individuals and work to the disadvantage of C. A and B are in the

same respective situations in relation to their partners and therefore can

be expected to act similarly, but there is no basis for their joint action.

Case IV is rather complex. Person A is no worse off if the threat is used

than if they merely fail to agree. (Remember that he cannot be better off in

the Th triplet than at IA or the Th triplet would simply become the IA

point.) He clearly can be more casual about taking the threat action than

either B or C. Boy B, though concerned to avoid anyone’s quitting, is less

so than. An equity outcome would yield 7, 5, 3, again a member of the

C-comp set.

One point of this example and its variations is simply that even in the

absence of coalition action the phenomenon of threat takes a greater

variety of forms in the triad than in the dyad.

Triad Action with Coalition

The simplest case of coalition involves no threat points (no Th or CoTh

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

triplets) but only CoA triplets. Thus A’s preference order, for example,

may have Rew(AB-CoA), Rew(AC-CoA), AB-CoA, or AC-CoA triplets at

the top of the list and IA and Rew triplets at the bottom. If two persons

come to their common CoA point as they work down their lists, they can

require the third person to accept their set of outcomes; for example, if the

AB-CoA point is on the frontier and A and B move to it in their respective

preference orders (perhaps after each has passed up a few Rew triplets

that were not acceptable to each other or to C), they can instate it as a

settlement point. They can do so despite the fact that C may prefer one or

more Rew triplets to the AB-CoA point. It is not a matter of imposing it by

threat but simply a matter of A and B acting together and limiting C

merely to doing his best for himself. Similarly, the AB-CoA point,

although not on the frontier, may define some Rew(AB-CoA) triplets that

A and B prefer to the Rew triplets but that C regards in a less favorable

light. By their ability to force the trio to the AB-CoA triplet (in the absence

of an effective threat for C), A and B can require C either to negotiate an

agreement among the Rew(AB-CoA) triplets or to take the less good

AB-COoA value.

Consider the following game as an example: by unanimous agreement

on its allocation the three persons will be given $15. Alternatively, if both

agree to doso, A and B can receive $6 each. In the absence of either type of

agreement, each person gets nothing. Thus IA = 0, 0, 0; AB-CoA = 6, 6, 0;

Rew = all triplets summing to 15 in which each person’s outcome is

greater than 0; and Rew(AB-CoA) =7, 7, 1 (the single allocation of 15 that

puts each person above AB-CoA). Persons A and B can limit C’s choice to

the Rew (AB-CoA) or the AB-CoA triplet. Note that there are Rew triplets

thatA might prefer to the Rew(AB-CoA) triplet (e.g., 9,3, 3), but he has no

better means of inducing the others to accept such triplets than each of

them has for inducing him to accept other triplets disadvantageous to

him. When A and B both recognize the futility of trying to attain such

individually advantageous contracts, they will both move down their

preference orders to the Rew(AC-CoA) triplet for which, as a coalition,

they can make a compelling case.

Agreement within a coalition may not come so easily as the above

example suggests. It will be recalled that AB-CoA may be a set of triplets

rather than a single one and this may force A and B to negotiate among

them oramong a number of Rew(AB-CoA) triplets. Let us modify the above

example merely by assuming that the alternative to a three-way agreement on a division of $15 is A and B’s agreement on a division of $12

(rather than a fixed $6 each). Now AB-CoA can yield any triplet in which

both A andB have more than 0 (their outcomes in the IA triplet). Thus (11,

1, 0), (10, 2, 0), (9, 3, 0), .

., (2, 10, 0), and (1, 11, 0) are members of the

NEGOTIATION AND COALITION FORMATION

AB-COA set, and (12, 2, 1), (11, 3, 1), (10, 4, 1), and so on, are members of

the Rew(AB-CoA) set. Clearly the AB-CoA set delimits the set of divisions

of $15 that A and B will consider; for example, precluding an equal

division (5, 5, 5). Although A and B can agree, however, that C should

receive no more than 1 (his minimal price for agreeing to any three-way

split of the $15 and all they can afford to give him while still giving

themselves some motivation for a three-way rather than a two-way

agreement), they have no structural basis for choosing among the

Rew(AB-CoA) triplets. Therefore at the same time that they are jointly

convincing C of the necessity of accepting a minimal share of the $15, they

must negotiate between themselves a division of the rest. Of course, a (7,

7, 1) agreement has the appeal of equality between A and B, and in the

absence of any basis for either of them to claim more we might expect it to

be their ultimate allocation. The situation may change radically if, as we

consider below, the Th or JA triplets favor either of them.

It may happen that any one of two or three coalitions is viable within

the triad. Consider the simpler case first in which as the three move down

their preference orders A comes to AB-CoA, B comes to both AB-CoA and

BC-CoA, andC comes toBC-CoA. PersonA now calls for the formation of

the A-B coalition, C calls for the BC coalition, andB has an interest in the

formation of both coalitions. A simple example would be a game in which

either A and B or B and C can divide $10, whichever pair can agree on an

allocation. Person B is clearly in an enviable position, sought after by both

A andC

coalition partner. Because

A’s and C’s alternatives to being in

the coalition are both zero, each of them should be willing to offer B a

lion’s share of the $10. B bargains with each of them from the position of

the CoA triplets he can generate with the other. Neither structurally nor

in terms of equity arguments is there any basis for predicting which of the

two coalitions will form—only that B will receive a large part of the $10.

A similar case is one in which each of the three possible coalitions is

desired by both its members. The example game is one in which any pair

can have $10 if it can agree on its allocation. This case, like the foregoing,

permits of no prediction about which coalition will eventually form. Any

tentative agreement by A and B can, in principle, always be upset by C’s

offering one of them more if he will join the A-C or B-C coalition. The

costs of negotiation and the risk of getting nothing by failure of some

agreement exert influence toward stable agreement within some pair and

the symmetry of dependence argues for an equal split within that pair.

These examples, lacking Th and CoTh triplets, involve bargaining

merely from the IA and CoA triplets. With the addition of threat triplets

the agreement process is likely to include pressures on one or more

members of the triad to accept compliance triplets. For example, with a

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

three-way agreement the trio can share $15; in the absence of agreement

each one will receive $3. Alternatively, if A and B agree to it, they will

divide $4 andC

will receive nothing. The AB-CoTh triplets are as follows:

(4, 0, 0), (3, 1, 0), (2, 2, 0), (1, 3, 0), and (0, 4, 0). By threatening to impose

one of these A and B can agree that C should accept an asymmetrical split

such as (7, 7, 1) which puts C below IA (3, 3, 3). A and B’s position is not

so clear-cut as it would be if there were only one AB-CoTh triplet (e.g., if

their alternative pairwise agreement yielded each a fixed $2). Thus C

would find some additional basis for resisting the threat (beyond the

sizable inequality it implies) in the possibility that A and B might not

readily agree on exactly how to back it up.

The reader will note the difference between the kinds of “game” rules

in these allocation examples that underlie the CoA triplets versus the

CoTh triplets. The AB-CoA triplet is based on a rule that permits A and B

to assure themselves better outcomes than they would receive if a

three-way agreement were not forthcoming. In contrast, the AB-CoTh

triplet is based on a rule that gives them as well as C less than what the

failure of three-way agreement yields.

From the preceding considerations it will be clear that once the possibilities exist for coalition formation within the triad (once there are CoA

and CoTh triplets) the ideal position of a particular member of the triad is

to be the favored member of a favored coalition. As we have seen, a

number of different configurations can create this ideal position. One is

that in which only one coalition has one highly favorable CoA triplet, and

in that triplet the particular person is strongly favored; for example, a

three-way agreement can divide $15, but a two-way agreement between

A and B can yield them $9 and $6 respectively. A second case is one in

which only two coalitions have highly favorable CoA triplets and the

particular person is the common member of both. In a third case the

AB-CoA or Rew(AB-CoA) triplets, whichever are on the frontier, are

negotiable between A and B, and the other coalition triplets are missing,

but the IA and/or Th triplets favor A. This puts A in a strong position to

induce B to enter a coalition with him but on terms that yield A a large

share of the coalition’s benefits. It is instances of this last kind that form

the basis for the generalization that each person will seek the coalition in

which the coalition’s power vis-a-vis the third person and his own power

vis-a-vis his coalition mate are maximized. The importance of both factors

in a person’s choice is shown by the fact that he will sometimes prefer a

less beneficial coalition in which he is the favored person to a more

beneficial coalition in which he is disfavored.

Epilogue

A Kind of Theory, 315

Limitations of the Matrix Concepts, 316

Essential Aspects of Present Theory, 317

Taxonomy of Interdependent Relationships, 317

Interdependence Patterns as Problems, 318

Functional Analysis, 319

The Transformation Process, 319

Attributional and Presentational Phenomena Created by

the Transformation Process, 320

Historical Notes, 321

Further Developments, 325

Levels of Interdependence, 325

Functional Accounts of Motivation, 326

i “i

bith @ ti ae

WIV]

al hope plies

ae iy

5 Teeth, one

Liiqragl hg ‘ig > Spo

rh wit teal @

uN rere bal

a °

@ pare

bee) ahi

ow,

, ia

iaorndel

€h,,

ica) Se

ve:

yates

v3.

ne ta tw!

; a lc

toaly,

is”

in elke

ABSTRACT

This chapter provides a brief interpretive commentary on the theoretical ideas

presented in this book. An outline of the kind of theory developed here lists its

essential points. Some historical notes relate our central assumptions and orienting ideas to those of Kurt Lewin. A

final section highlights several further lines of

development of the present theoretical approach.

A KIND OF THEORY

Our purpose in this section is to make explicit what was implicit in the

preceding chapters by describing in general terms the kind of theory

presented in this book. It must be admitted that this represents a set of

post hoc insights on our part. In advance of our work on this book we did

not have clearly in mind the kind of theory outlined here. Rather we

developed, in a rather exploratory and piecemeal way, the concepts we

found to be needed to deal with certain basic observations and data from

the social psychological study of interpersonal relations. After the fact we

found it natural to organize the various ideas in the manner of the

preceding chapters. Now, still further after the fact, we are able to step

back and examine in more general terms the kind of theory we have

evolved and perhaps suggest reasons why that kind of theory is needed.

To speak of and endorse the kind of theory that is represented is to

imply that other versions of this kind of theory can be developed. It is

precisely our purpose to emphasize that possibility and to urge its realization.We believe that as other means are developed for the systematic

characterization and analysis of social interdependence a different theory

of this sort can be developed. We also mean to suggest that any such

theory should deal with the same problems that we have and will probably have the same general terms; in that sense, it will be the same kind.

That is to indicate our confidence that our analysis has revealed many

essential aspects of interpersonal relations—aspects that no theory can

overlook—as well as our conviction that our general approach to conceptualizing these aspects is, in the long run, a viable one.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Limitations of the Matrix Concepts

It is our hope that the reader who has followed the successive developments in this book faithfully will agree with our high regard for the

outcome matrix as a conceptual tool for the analysis of social interdependence. Even the minimal matrix, the2 x2, describes a diverse array

of interpersonal structures and is richly suggestive of the processes

associated with them. This matrix, however, has certain limitations that

lead us to suspect that it will eventually be replaced as the central analytic

device (with the result, as suggested, that the kind of theory presented

here will have to be rewritten in terms of somewhat different interdependence concepts).

In its application to specific cases there are certain ambiguities in the

delineation of the outcome matrix. One problem has to do with specifying

the behavioral options for each person. This is misleadingly easy in

experimental application of the matrix but often an uncertain matter for

natural relationships. It seems clear that the options identified by an

outsider may be quite different from those distinguished by the persons

themselves. Our distinction (in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959, and in Chapter

1 of this book) between the ‘‘objective’” and “‘subjective’”’ matrix recognizes this fact. The notion of the objective matrix is based on the

assumption that a well-informed and thorough analysis can identify

more accurately than can the participants the structure of their relationship. (The attributional assumptions here are obvious:

a number of

independent, objective, and expert analysts, if given sufficient information—about this and similar relationships—can make more veridical

discriminations and judgments than can the involved participants with

their limited perspectives.) According to this view, the objective matrix

represents a causal structure which, whether recognized or not, plays a

shaping role in the relationship and is therefore a reality of which it would

be well for the participants to become cognizant. An important line of

analysis and research for the future will have the purpose of determining

the course of development in persons’ understandings of their interdependence. Because there can be two different subjective views of the

same dyadic matrix (cf. Ingmar Bergman’s Scenes from a Marriage), this

analysis must identify the conditions that promote convergence in their

understandings. In addition, as the concept of objective matrix highlights, we must identify processes that promote greater insight into and

pursuit of the full range of possibilities immanent in their relationship.

These processes will include the creative imagining and construction of

new options that have not, perhaps, been available in the common

examples of similar relationships.

EPILOGUE

Beyond the various ambiguities associated with the definition of the

interdependence matrix its more serious limitations seem to lie in its static

nature. The future elaboration of interdependence theory will profit

most, in our estimation, from the development of concepts that lend

themselves not only to characterizing the patterns at any given point in

time but also to describing their temporal trends and changes. Fruitful

initial steps would consist of specifying rules for generating scenarios of

interaction from structural patterns of interdependence. Such rules

would have to take account of the implications of the outcome matrix

identified in Chapter 10. In addition, a temporal analysis will have to take

account of various process constraints. It is well known, from numerous

experimental studies, that the process that develops in a particular game

depends not only on its pattern but also on such factors as the players’

information, their opportunities for communication, and the conditions

that determine the timing and visibility of their choices. [An important

though often overlooked aspect of the original story of the Prisoner’s

Dilemma (see p. 42) is that the district attorney constrained the decision

process in a particular way. By separating the prisoners and requiring

them to make independent decisions without communication,

increased the likelihood of the particular outcome, mutual confession,

that he preferred. |

We have long been aware of temporal changes in many of the rewards

and costs associated with behavior (cf. e.g., Chapter 1 in Thibaut and

Kelley, 1959). The short-term phenomena of satiation and fatigue require

a model of interdependence that reflects the dependence of later outcomes on earlier ones. In addition, models intended to cover long-term

trends in relationship dependencies must take account of changes, with

maturation and aging, in motives and skills.

These brief comments simply point to some of the limitations of the

outcome matrix

as the central concept for the analysis of interdependence. The present theory was developed with the matrix as its

major instrument. With drastic modifications in or replacements of

that device, the theory will have to be rewritten. The general form of

what we have done, however, is not dependent on the outcome matrix.

We shall try to describe the general characteristics of the present formulation.

Essential Aspects of Present Theory

Taxonomy of Interdependent Relationships

Our analysis centers around an examination of types of interpersonal

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

relationship in which they are described and differentiated in terms of

interdependence. This is a uniquely social psychological focus, to be

contrasted with a typology of persons (personality psychology) or of

environments (environmental psychology).

Interdependence Patterns as Problems

The particular pattern of interdependence that characterizes a relationship determines the special set of problems confronting it. The taxonomy of relationships is, then, a taxonomy of problems, each type of

interdependence pattern involving its unique problematic aspects and

implying the necessary elements of solution. These problems exist for the

individuals involved and for the collectivity (dyad, triad, etc.) they constitute. In the collectivity the problems are often shared in the sense that

one person’s solution depends on another’s solution. Thus the possibility

exists for dealing with the commonalities among the individual problems

by way of coordinated.or joint solutions.

Purposes Served by the Components Analysis.

The outcome matrix was our

conceptual device for developing the taxonomy. It held out to us the

attractive possibility of deriving qualitative differences among relationships from quantitative and configurational analysis. This analysis

was conducted by identifying the components of the matrix, determining

their relative magnitudes,

and specifying

their orientations

(concordance, correspondence) in relation to one another. Specifically, the

components analysis provided a useful bookkeeping system for exploring the domain of 2 x 2 interdependence matrices, identifying the salient

patterns, and classifying them. It also pointed to a major kind of variation

in type of joint problem; the central distinction between MFC and MBC

served to highlight the difference between “exchange” and ‘‘coordination.” The components analysis also provided an analytic framework

for identifying the antecedents of various patterns; for example, the

factors underlying correspondence versus noncorrespondence of outcomes. In Chapter 9 the components analysis provided guides for dealing

with the third person and the complexities in pattern arising from

the expansion of the dyad into a triad. In brief, the components constituted the elements of the structural aspects of our analysis. In analogy

to the role of atoms and molecules

in chemical theory, in their

variations in magnitudes and relative orientations, the several types of

component generated qualitatively different patterns and types of

phenomena.

EPILOGUE

Functional Analysis

The taxonomy of problems provided a basis for a functional analysis. We

assumed that in their experience with the various problems and from the

necessity of coping with them, people develop solutions to them. Adaptation to situations of social interdependence is viewed as the source of

both social norms and individual rules. Adaptation is seen to result from

multiple processes. In his own direct experience in interdependent relationships each individual has opportunities to learn useful rules, including both the prosocial, moral concepts and the more egocentric, practical

rules of thumb for ‘getting along with people.” This experience is often

preceded by and accompanied by social instruction in the moral and

practical aspects of social relationships, which involve both explicit teaching and the provision of exemplars of social behavior. In the course of its

history mankind has long encountered

the basic types of interdependence and problems we have identified. In the collective wisdom

about social life an understanding of the important variations of interpersonal relationships and of useful ways of dealing with them is implicit.

Ordinarily, the instruction provided the individual by lecture and model

will be consistent with his own experience; hence the two modes of

acquisition will be mutually reinforcing. Inconsistency will occur at times

of sharp social and technological change as when changing sex role

conceptions render outmoded the earlier behavioral rules that assumed a

high degree of asymmetry in dependence within the heterosexual dyad.

The preceding comments should not be taken to imply an assumption

that the moral and practical rules that persons commonly follow are

optimally adapted to the nature of their interdependent relationships. We

have seen that the functionally optimal rules are highly contingent, that

they depend both on the nature of the relationship and the transformations that partners make. This complexity suggests that the adaptation people make to the requirements of their relationships are often

likely to be imperfect.

The Transformation Process

The solutions to the problems of interdependence often require that

behavior be freed from control by the actor’s immediate situation. It must

become partially responsive to the situations of other persons and to

possible future situations. This was demonstrable for various matrices in

our taxonomy of relationships and must be true for interdependence

problems, however described. We have found it useful to describe this

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

process in terms of a shift from the given to the effective matrix—a transformation of the given matrix into one that controls behavior. The conceptual step taken here, of assuming that a person responds to a particular given situation as if it were a different one, has the important

consequence of enabling both given and effective situations to be described

in the same terms—in our case in matrix terms. The common terms of

description in turn make it possible to examine the given situations from

the point of view of what transformations are logically possible and which

of them serve to yield better given outcomes than if the given situation

were reacted to directly. The end result of this conceptual strategy is

that it becomes plausible to describe what the person learns, as ways

of dealing with problems of interdependence, in terms of matrixtransforming rules, values, and sequences. The specific psychological

processes involved (control of attention and thought, binding of tension,

and self-regulation of motivation) were not an explicit part of our analysis

but it contains useful implications for the delineation of such processes

(see pp. 202-206).

Attributional and Presentational Phenomena Created by the Transformation Process

The loosening of the linkage between behavior and the immediate situation involved in the transformation process introduces a set of causal

factors into behavior that are intimately concerned with and, indeed,

define the person. It is at the transformation junction in the chain of

behavioral causation that the person appears as a causal agent. To other

persons this means that the voluntary and conscious factors (e.g., ego

strength, character,

will power) underlying the person’s behavior

become apparent in contrast to external, situational factors (e.g., incentives, unconditioned stimuli) and internal, uncontrollable factors (biological drives, deeply rooted psychic needs). To the person himself the

transformation process provides manifestations of the ‘‘self’”’ as an agent

in control of his own behavior and outcomes.

From the point of view of persons interdependent with an actor the

transformation process creates the special set of attributional problems,

outlined in Chapter 8, having to do with inferring the actor’s orientation

to and long-range goals for the relationship. For the actor the transformation process provides opportunities for self-presentation. The

“self” as a causal agent is made apparent to others (as, also, to the self) by

means of behavior that is independent of the structure of the immediate

situation. Self-presentation and, indeed, the very properties it is possible

for an individual to show to others and to know about himself are

EPILOGUE

determined by the structure of the interdependent situations in which he

finds himself. An understanding of this basic fact underlies his decisions

about entering or arranging situations with particular patterns of interdependence.

The attributional problems of the actor’s various partners, created by

the transformational process, have their parallels in the assessment problems that face the social psychologist. Faced with a heterogeneity of

reactions to a specific set of incentives, we find it difficult to distinguish

variations in given matrices from variations in the transformations made

of them. Our doubts about the proper generalizations to be drawn from

observed behavior are heightened by our awareness of the special selfpresentational tendencies that may be elicited by our subjects’ consciousness of the assessment context for their behavior. Some of these

contextual matters are discussed briefly in Chapter 7.

HISTORICAL NOTES

It may add to the understanding of the central ideas in this book to relate

them to certain earlier conceptions in social psychology. It is particularly

useful to link them to and compare them with the ideas of the man with

whom we took our graduate studies—Kurt Lewin. Although it is not our

principal intention here, to highlight these intellectual roots of our basic

ideas may also help to discourage the notion that we have some “‘ultimate

loyalties” to Hullian learning theory, as suggested by Chadwick-Jones

(1976, p. 64). In this and our earlier book we have found that ‘“behaviour

theory” is useful at many points in our argument but the more fundamental notions are drawn from Lewin.

Lewin’s influence is perhaps most strikingly present in the adoption of

interdependence as the starting point of our analysis. This was the property

to which Lewin gave a central position in his first papers in which he

established the field of group dynamics. He wrote: ‘The essence of a

group is not the similarity or dissimilarity of its members, but their

interdependence. A group can be characterized as a ‘dynamic whole’; this

means that a change in the state of any subpart changes the state of any

other subpart’ (1948, p. 84). Interdependence, of course, can be given

many different meanings depending on what changes in state are identified. Lewin’s topological concepts have had great usefulness in the

analysis of the flow of information or influence among the members of a

group (as in French, 1956; and Harary, Norman, and Cartwright, 1965).

The motivational concepts, however, involving valences and their related

force fields, were not readily adaptable to problems of outcome interINTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

dependence. The interdependence between persons in their locomotion

toward goals was only awkwardly represented in the life space and only

gross distinctions in types of interdependence were suggested (e.g.,

Deutsch’s promotive versus contrient interdependence, 1949). These limitations reflected the difficulties that Lewin encountered in formulating

direction and the relative directions of different forces in the topologically

defined life space (see Lewin, 1938, and Leeper’s critique, 1943). It should

be noted that Lewin’s writings about social interdependence were limited

to the last several years before his death. It seems clear that he was

exploring a variety of ways to describe motivational interdependence and

had not yet thoroughly developed any one way [cf. his pages on marital

conflict (1948, pp. 84-102; 1951, pp. 188-237)]. As the reader of this book

has seen, the analytic tool we have used, the outcome matrix, though not

without its limitations, generates a rich set of suggestive distinctions

among degrees and patterns of interdependence between persons in the

attainment of their respective goals.

The life space, with its topological analysis of path and goal regions and

its vector analysis of the forces acting on the person, deals essentially with

the decisions and problems facing a single person. The outcome matrix,

in contrast, deals with the interweaving of the decisions of several persons and often (when there is some correspondence of outcomes) with

their joint problems. Despite the different purposes of the two kinds of

analysis, certain aspects of our general strategy in developing the outcome matrix follow Lewin’s precepts very closely.

The Principle of Contemporaneity.

Lewin emphasized that ‘any behavior

or other change in a psychological field depends only upon the psychological field at that time” (1951, p. 45). This did not reflect a lack of interest

in historical (developmental and learning) problems but was simply an

insistence that the analysis of causal factors for a given event in the life

space had to focus ultimately on processes contemporaneous with that

event. We have followed this principle in our focus on the effective matrix.

This summarizes the options and motives operative at the time of a given

interaction and directly controlling the nature of that interaction. The

antecedents of these causal factors are described in part by the given

matrix and the transformations that are brought to bear on it. The more

distal antecedents have been considered in our discussion of the psychological bases of rewards and costs and of behavioral facilitation and

interference (Chapters 3 and 4 in Thibaut and Kelley, 1959). Changes in

the effective matrix, from one point in time to another, are treated in terms

of the effects of long- and short-run changes in factors underlying the

EPILOGUE

given rewards and costs (e.g., changes in needs and skills, satiation and

fatigue effects) and shifts in the prevailing transformations.

Taxonomy of Situations.

Lewin was keenly aware of the importance of

characterizing the behavioral field in ways that afford a basis for identifying different types of situation. Leeper (1943) made the following

observation:

The main point of departure for [Lewin’s ] work is the conviction that the

influence of the situation (as personally organized or conceived) is .

. so

important and so complex that specialized, technical concepts must be

developed that will increase our capacity to identify and understand the

factors and relationships that are involved here (p. 13).

Lewin’s analytic concepts were types of goal and force field and their

positions in relation to one another. Best known is his analysis of

types of conflict (approach-approach, avoidance-avoidance, approachavoidance) and variations in the locations of barriers (restraining forces)

associated with each type of conflict (Lewin, 1935, pp. 87-94; 1946, pp.

809-815). This theoretical emphasis on a situational typology is directly

reflected in Roger Barker’s endeavor to identify the important ‘behavior

settings” that an individual enters during his daily life (1968).

Our taxonomic efforts have focused on identifying types of interdependence in dyads and triads (see Chapter 11 in Thibaut and Kelley,

1959, and Chapters 4 and 9 of this book) and types of task that an

interdependent pair may encounter (Chapter 9 in Thibaut and Kelley,

1959). Like Lewin, we analyze the types of situation for the patterns of

behavior they are likely to generate. Additionally, we investigate (Chapter 7 of this book) the various interdependence patterns for what they

encourage

in the development

of generalized

adaptational

tendencies—the transformational rules and evaluative criteria that they

make it desirable for individuals to adopt in order to facilitate efficient

management of the conflict-creating properties of the situations. This

point relates to those that follow.

Cognitive Restructuring of the Field.

Lewin (1946, pp. 802-804) observed

that the behavioral field often posed problems for the person’s locomotion that could be solved by a cognitive restructuring of the field. His

favorite example was the detour or Umweg problem in which the child

was unable to circumvent a barrier until he identified a path of connected

regions that went around the barrier and included the goal region. This

“distinguished path” often required the child to turn his back on the goal

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

and to move away from it temporarily in order, ultimately, to reach it. The

detour concept is clearly apparent in our notion of value transformations; for example, the person suppresses his interest in his own

outcomes and concerns himself with those of the partner in order to

improve his own outcomes in the long run. The notion of selective suppression of one’s interests is similar to Lewin’s concept of potency of the

situation. A choice problem can be seen as involving overlapping situations, one coordinated to each of the several alternative goals. Lewin

described a decision as raising the potency of one of the situations permanently, thus enabling it to dominate the other situations. This

phenomenon can be described in transformational terms, the rule being

to make up one’s mind and then put the rejected alternatives out of mind.

The functional value of this rule, in promoting conflict-free action, is

apparent. The historical origin of Festinger’s (1957) ideas about a process

of postdecisional reduction of cognitive dissonance is suggested here.

The Motivational Properties of Conflict.

Lewin postulated that conflict situations (individual decision conflicts) give rise to emotional tension, the

intensity of which is a function of the strength of the opposing forces

(Lewin, 1951, p. 268). Similarly, tension develops in cognitively unstructured situations in which there is uncertainty about paths to goals, inasmuch as such situations result in psychological conflict (Deutsch and

Krauss, 1965, p. 45). The tension motivates restless exploratory behavior

and, if not too great, promotes the solution of detour and other cognitive

problems.

We have relied on this property of situations of individual conflict and

uncertainty in accounting for the existence of transformational tendencies. The motivation for the invention of transformations is seen to

stem from the unpleasantness of situations that lack clear choice criteria

and from the costs of interpersonal conflict and the thwarting of individual goals. In his experience with relief from conflict-based tension by

following certain rules and criteria the individual’s adherence to them is

strengthened and gains a certain amount of autonomy. Also, the moral

teachings that advocate the prosocial transformations gain support from

tension reduction.

[In using conflict-based tension as a motivational

state, the reduction of which is reinforcing, our analysis essentially follows that of Brown and Farber (1951) who identify a frustration-produced

drive. |

The Person as a Causal Agent.

In Chapter 7 we emphasized the fact that

transformation processes reduce the control of the given outcomes over

the behavior of the person. Itis at this point in the causal sequence leading

EPILOGUE

up to social behavior that the ‘‘person” appears, in fact and in an attributional sense, as a causal agent. The person who modifies his incentive

conditions by producing a sharp transformation between the given and

the effective matrix appears (to himself and others) as an active agent who,

in part, governs his own behavior and limits its governance by the

external environment and by his own drives and impulses. In short, he

shows self-control of interests and self-regulation of action. In a special

but real sense the transformation process is the juncture at which the

person P becomes available for inclusion in Lewin’s famous formula, B =

f(P, E): behavior is a function of the person and the environment.

FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS

Two of the implications of our analysis which have received little more

than mention in the preceding chapters seem especially promising for

further theoretical development.

Levels of Interdependence

The analysis of the transformation process reveals that people are

interdependent not only at the level of the specific behaviors they enact

but also at the level of the transformations they make of their given matrix;

that is to say, a person’s outcomes will depend not only on his own

transformations but on those of his partners. In certain given patterns,

such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma, a person is ill-advised to adopt a jointwelfare orientation to the relationship unless he is assured that the

partner will do likewise. This points to a more general phenomenon, that

people are interdependent with respect to the general characteristics and

attitudes they display in a relationship. From the internalization of social

and personal values (as promoted by the functional utility of the transformational process) they gain rewards and incur costs not only from

their own and their partner’s behavior but also from the kind of person

they are able to “be” in the interaction and the kind of person they find

the partner to be. Persons are similarly interdependent in the norm and

role preference and propensities they bring to their relationships.

The events at these higher levels of interdependence are constituted of

real or perceived patterns of organization of events at the specific

behavioral level. A person reveals that he has a particular attitude or

personal characteristic by some consistency in his behavioral patterning.

Thus “considerateness” is revealed by frequent acquiescence to the

partner’s conflicting interests. Similarly, his adoption of a particular norm

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

for the relationship (e.g., his sex-derived right to precedence in instances

of interest conflict) is revealed by a behavior pattern consistent with that

norm (such as frequent preemption in Chicken-like patterns; persistence

in overriding the partner’s expressed preferences; advocacy of the same

pattern for other males). Thus the higher levels of interdependence are

linked to the behavioral level by the processes of attribution and selfpresentation. This gives rise to what is probably a common kind of

conflict having to do with whether a particular behavioral event is to be

considered as having more general significance.

A common form of this

conflict, described as ‘attributional conflict’ by Orvis, Kelley, and Butler

(1976), appears to be that in which the enactor of a negative behavior

believes it is to be taken only as a special instance and is not to be

generalized from, whereas the partner is inclined to draw broad inferences from the event (the actor is a bad person or has negative attitudes

toward the partner).

The conception of levels of interdependence deserves further thought.

It seems reasonable to assume that interdependence can be described in

the same terms at both the specific behavioral level and at the more

abstract or general levels. (It will certainly be convenient, conceptually, if

this proves to be the case.) Thus the basic interdependence components

seem applicable to the level of personal characteristics, each person

having RC-type preferences for how.he himself appears, FC-type preferences for what the partner is like as a person, and BC-type preferences

for combining the two (the latter corresponding to ideal models of person

pairing). The central problems in developing the notion of levels of

interdependence have to do with identifying the major levels and determining the dynamic relations among them. This will require a great

expansion in our current understanding of the real and perceived organization of interpersonal behavior.

Functional Accounts of Motivation

The functional

analysis underlying our conception

of the transformational process points to some of the major components of social

motivation (types of choice criterion and rules for social behavior) and

their origin in the requirements of social interdependence. As briefly

mentioned in Chapter 7, it seems likely to us that a more extensive

analysis of this sort can be brought to bear on such phenomena as

“unequivocal behavioral orientation,’’ cognitive dissonance, reactance,

competence, and social comparison. We have continued to be uneasy

about the ad hoc invocation or postulation of such motives and tendencies

as a means of defining areas of research or of solving social psychological

EPILOGUE

problems (cf. Thibaut and Kelley, 1959,-pp. 5, 116, 132). The major

difficulties with this approach as we see it, are ambiguity about the

ultimate “‘list” from which such tendencies are drawn and unclarity about

the interrelations among the various tendencies

(relative potency,

domains of applicability, and so on). Thus it is difficult to see how

motivational theory in social psychology can ever evolve from an ad hoc

set of compartmentalized research topics into a coherent and inclusive set

of interconnected principles.

It seems to us now to be possible to derive many of the qualitative

variations in motivation from quantitative analysis of the structure of

problems and especially from social interdependence problems. Our

analysis in Chapter 7 merely scratches the surface of the rich possibilities.

We focus on the rules and norms required by certain interpersonal relationships, but we take for granted many of the more basic motives and

behavioral tendencies that these and other of life’s problems require the

individual to have. A primary requirement for all problems, impersonal

as well as interpersonal, is that the individual be attentive to his environment and concerned about its causal structure. A realistic sense of

own causal efficacy versus own dependence and helplessness is an essential aspect of one’s causal knowledge. It is also usually essential to take

account of the future and to plan ahead. Our analysis has taken for

granted these basic necessities as they are reflected in the importance of

paying attention to the partner’s outcomes and future reactions to present

events and in the necessity of expressing own needs and interests so that

the partner’s causal analysis of the relationship can also have some basic

degree of veridicality. Few, or perhaps none, of these requirements are

absolute. Most or all are contingent on circumstances, nature of the

problem, and interdependence. We believe the same can be said of the

kinds of motive and tendency mentioned at the outset—that they have a

common functional utility but are always inappropriate for some of life’s

situations.

Our suggestion, then, is that attempts be made along the lines of

functionalistic analysis to categorize both interpersonal and impersonal

problems and to derive their implications for the dispositional and motivational repertory of the well-adapted person. An analysis of this sort will

provide us with a sense of the total set of such tendencies, insights into

their interrelations, and understanding of their contingent utility. This

will, we believe, provide a framework within which order can be brought

to the current plethora of arbitrary and disconnected motivational

assumptions within social and personality psychology. It will also, as an

incidental but important result, provide ways of dealing systematically

with questions regarding the elements in a behavioral and motivational

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

repertory that are spurious, maladaptive, and abnormal. Perhaps most

important will be the ultimate relevance of this analysis to evaluating the

quality of people’s adaptation to their past, present, and future worlds. It

seems clear that when there are massive changes in the distribution and

locus of types of problematic situation and relationship the typical person’s motives and tendencies are likely to become sharply inappropriate.

For example, as social interdependence increases, as coordination problems assume greater importance than exchange problems, and as diminishing resources heighten the general level of noncorrespondence of

outcomes, the once appropriate mixtures of cooperative and competitive

tendencies and their associated rules for contingent application may

become highly maladaptive. A description of the changing nature of

interdependence and an analysis of its behavioral implications seem

necessary if man’s rate of adaptation is to keep pace with the rate of

change in his world’s requirements.

Bibliography

Alexander, C. N., Jr. and Weil, H. G. Players, persons, and purposes: Situational meaning

and the Prisoner’s Dilemma game. Sociometry, 1969, 32, 121-144.

Aronfreed, J. Conduct and conscience. New York: Academic, 1968.

Aronson, E. and Linder, D. Gain and loss of esteem as determinants of interpersonal

attractiveness. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1965, 1, 156-171.

Bandura, A. Social-learning theory of identificatory processes. In D. A. Goslin (Ed.),

Handbook of socialization theory and research. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1969. Pp. 213Barker, R. G. Ecological psychology. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1968.

Benton, A. A., Kelley, H. H., and Liebling, B. Effects of extremity of offers and concession

rate on the outcomes of bargaining. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1972, 24,

73-83.

Bonacich, P. Norms and cohesion as adaptive responses to potential conflict: An experimental study. Sociometry, 1972, 35, 357-375.

Braithwaite, R. B. Theory of games as a tool for the moral philosopher. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1955.

Brehm, J. W. and Cole, A. H. Effect of a favor which reduces freedom. Journal of Personality

and Social Psychology, 1966, 3, 420-426.

Brown, B. The effects of need to maintain face on interpersonal bargaining. Journal of

Experimental Social Psychology, 1968, 4, 107-122.

Brown, J. S. and Farber, I. E. Emotions conceptualized as intervening variables with

suggestions toward a theory of frustration. Psychological Bulletin, 1951, 48, 465-495.

Chadwick-Jones, J. K. Social exchange theory: Its structure and influence in social psychology.

New York: Academic, 1976.

Christie, R. and Geis, F. L. Studies in Machiavellianism. New York: Academic, 1970.

Daniels,

F. V. Communication,

incentive,

and structural variables

in interpersonal

exchange and negotiation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1967, 3, 47-74.

Deutsch, M. A theory of cooperation and competition. Human Relations, 1949, 2, 129-152.

Deutsch, M. Trust and suspicion. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1958, 2, 265-279.

Deutsch, M. Bargaining, threat, and communication: Some experimental studies. In A.

Archibald (Ed.), Strategic interaction and conflict. Berkeley, Calif.: Institute of International Studies, 1966. Pp. 19-41.

Deutsch, M. and Krauss, R. M. Theories in social psychology. New York: Basic Books, 1965.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Evans, G. Effect of unilateral promise and value of rewards upon cooperation and trust.

Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1964, 69, 587-590.

Festinger, L. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, Ill.: Row, Peterson, 1957.

Foa, U. G. and Foa, E. B. Resource theory of social exchange. Morristown, N. J.: General

Learning Press, 1975.

French, J. R. P., Jr. A formal theory of social power. Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 181-194.

Friedland, N., Arnold, S. E., and Thibaut, J. W. Motivational bases in mixed-motive

interactions: The effects of comparison levels. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,

Gallo, P. J., Jr. Effects of increased incentives upon the use of threat in bargaining. Journal of

Personality and Social Psychology, 1966, 4, 14-20.

Gouldner, A. W. The norm of reciprocity. American Sociological Review, 1960, 25, 165-167.

Gruder, C. L. Relationships with opponents and partner in mixed-motive bargaining.

Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1971, 15, 403-416.

Gumpert, P., Deutsch, M., and Epstein, Y. Effect of incentive magnitude on cooperation in

the Prisoner's Dilemma game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1969, 11, 66-69.

Guyer, M. and Rapoport, A. Threat in a two-person game. Journal of Experimental Social

Psychology, 1970, 6, 11-26.

Hamburger, H. Separable games. Behavioral Science, 1969, 14, 121-132.

Hamburger, H. N-person Prisoner’s Dilemma. Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 1973, 3,

27-48.

Hamilton, E. and Cairns, H. (Eds.), The collected dialogues of Plato (including the letters).

Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1969.

Hamilton, W. D. The genetical evolution of social behavior. Journal of Theoretical Biology,

Harary, F., Norman, R. Z., and Cartwright, D. Structural models: An introduction to the theory

of directed graphs. New York: Wiley, 1958.

Heider, F. The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley, 1958.

Homans, G. C. Social behavior: Its elementary forms. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,

Howard, N. The paradoxes of rationality: Theory of metagames and political behavior. Cambridge:

MIT Press, 1971.

Jones, E. E. Ingratiation. New York: Appleton-Century, 1964.

Jones, E. E. and Davis, K. E. From acts to dispositions: The attribution process in person

perception. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology, Vol. 2. New

York: Academic, 1965. Pp. 219-266.

Jones, E. E. and Gerard, H. B. Foundations of social psychology. New York: Wiley, 1967.

Jones, E. E. and Goethals, G. R. Order effects in impression formation: Attribution context and the

nature of the entity. Morristown, N. J.: General Learning Press, 1971.

Jones, E. E. and Nisbett, R. E. The actor and the observer: Divergent perceptions of the causes of

behavior. Morristown, N. J.: General Learning Press, 1971.

Jones, E. E. and Wortman, C. Ingratiation; An attributional approach. Morristown, N. J.:

General Learning Press, 1973.

Kelley, H. H. Attribution theory in social psychology. In D. Levine (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1967. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1967. Pp. 192-238.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kelley, H. H. Attribution in social interaction. Morristown, N. J.: General Learning Press,

Kelley, H. H. Causal schemata and the attribution process. Morristown, N. J.: General Learning

Press, 1972.

Kelley, H. H. and Schenitski, D. P. Bargaining. Chapter 10 in C. G. McClintock (Ed.),

Experimental social psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1972. Pp.

Kelley, H. H., Shure, G. H., Deutsch, M., Faucheux, C., Lanzetta, J. T., Moscovici, S.,

Nuttin, J. M., Jr., Rabbie, J. M. and Thibaut, J. W. A comparative experimental study of

negotiation behavior, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

Kelley, H. H. and Stahelski, A. J. The inference of intentions from moves in the Prisoner’s

Dilemma game. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1970a, 6, 401-419.

Kelley, H. H. and Stahelski, A. J. The social interaction basis of cooperators’ and competitors’ beliefs about others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1970b, 16,

66-91.

Kelley, H. H. and Thibaut, J. W. Group problem solving. Chapter 29 in G. Lindzey and E.

Aronson (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology, second edition. Reading, Mass.:

Addison-Wesley, 1969. Volume 4, pp. 1-101.

Kelley, H. H., Thibaut, J. W., Radloff, R., and Mundy, D. The development of cooperation

in the “minimal social situation.” Psychological Monographs, 1962, 76, (19) (whole no.

538).

Kulhman, D. M. and Marshello, A. F. J. Individual differences in game motivation as

moderators of preprogrammed strategy effects in Prisoner’s Dilemma. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 32, 922-931.

Leeper, R. W. Lewin’s topological and vector psychology: A digest and a critique. Eugene, Oregon:

University of Oregon, 1943.

Lewin, K. A dynamic theory of personality. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1935.

Lewin, K. The conceptual representation and the measurement of psychological forces.

Contributions to Psychological Theory, 1938, 1 (4), Serial No. 4, 1-247.

Lewin, K. Behavior and development as a function of the total situation. In L. Carmichael

(Ed.), Manual of Child Psychology. New York: Wiley, 1946. Pp. 791-844.

Lewin, K. Resolving social conflicts. New York: Harper, 1948.

Lewin, K. Field theory in social science. New York: Harper and Row, 1951.

Luce, R. D. and Raiffa, H. Games and Decisions. New York: Wiley, 1957.

McClintock, C. G. Game behavior and social motivation in interpersonal settings. In C. G.

McClintock (Ed.), Experimental social psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1972a. Pp. 271-297.

McClintock, C. G. Social motivation—a set of propositions. Behavioral Science, 1972b, 17,

McClintock, C. G. and McNeel, S. P. Reward level and game playing behavior. Journal of

Conflict Resolution, 1966a, 10, 98-102.

McClintock, C. G. and McNeel, S. P. Reward and score feedback as determinants of

cooperative and competitive game behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

McClintock, C. G. and McNeel, S. P. Prior dyadic experience and monetary reward as

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

determinants of cooperative and competitive game behavior. Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology, 1967, 5, 282-294.

Madsen, M. C. and Shapira, A. Cooperative and competitive behavior of urban AfroAmerican,

Anglo-American,

Mexican-American,

and Mexican

village children.

Developmental Psychology, 1970, 3, 16-20.

Marlowe, D., Gergen, K. J., and Doob, A. N. Opponent’s personality, expectation of social

interaction, and interpersonal bargaining. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

Marwell, G., Ratcliff, K., and Schmitt, D. R. Minimizing differences in a maximizing

difference game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1969, 12, 158-163.

Mehrabian, A. Nonverbal communication. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, 1972.

Messick, D. M. and McClintock, C. G. Motivational bases of choice in experimental games.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 4, 1-25.

Messick, D. M. and Thorngate, W. Relative gain maximization in experimental games.

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1967, 3, 85-101.

Miller, D. T. and Holmes, J. G. The role of situational restrictiveness on self-fulfilling

prophecies: A theoretical and empirical extension of Kelley and Stahelski’s Triangle

Hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 31, 661-673.

Mischel, W. Toward a cognitive learning reconceptualization of personality. Psychological

Review, 1973, 80, 252-283.

Mischel, W. Processes in delay of gratification. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology, Volume 7. New York: Academic, 1974. Pp. 249-272.

Montague, A. On being human. New York: Schuman, 1951.

Morgan, W.R. and Sawyer, J. Bargaining, expectations, and the preference for equality over

equity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1967, 6, 139-149.

Orvis, B. R., Kelley, H. H., and Butler, D. Attributional conflict in young couples. In J. H.

Harvey, W. J. Ickes, and R. E. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in attribution research, Vol. 1.

Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum Associates, 1976. Pp. 353-386.

Osgood, C. E. An alternative to war or surrender. Urbana: University of Illinois Press,

Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., and Tannenbaum, P. H. The measurement of meaning. Urbana:

University of Illinois Press, 1957.

Oskamp, S. Effects of programmed strategies on cooperation in the Prisoner’s Dilemma and

other mixed-motive games. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1971, 15, 225-259.

Pepitone, A., Maderna, A., Caporicci, E., Tiberi, E., lacono, G., de Majo, G., Perfetto, M.,

Asprea, A., Villone, G., Fua, G., and Tonucci, F. Justice in choice behavior: A crosscultural study. International Journal of Psychology. 1970, 5, 1-10.

Pilisuk, M. and Skolnick, P. Inducing trust: A test of the Osgood proposal. Journal of

Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 8, 121-133.

Pruitt, D. G. Reward structure and cooperation: The decomposed Prisoner’s Dilemma

game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1967, 7, 21-27.

Pruitt, D. G. Reciprocity and credit building in the laboratory dyad. Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology, 1968, 8, 143-147.

Pruitt, D. G. Motivational processes in the decomposed Prisoner’s Dilemma game. Journal

of Personality and Social Psychology, 1970, 14, 227-238.

Pruitt, D. G. and Drews, J. L. The effect of time pressure, time elapsed, and the opponent’s

BIBLIOGRAPHY

concession rate on behavior in negotiation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,

Pruitt, D. G. and Lewis, S. A. Development of integrative solutions in bilateral negotiation.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 31, 621-633.

Radlow, R., Weidner, M. F., and Hurst, P. M. The effect of incentive magnitude and

“motivational orientation” upon choice behavior in a two-person non-zero-sum game.

Journal of Social Psychology, 1968, 74, 199-208.

Rapoport, A. and Guyer, M. A taxonomy of 2 x2 games. General Systems, 1966, 11, 203-214.

Schelling, T. C. The strategy of conflict. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960.

Schopler, J. and Thompson, V. Role of attribution processes in mediating amount of

reciprocity for a favor. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 10, 243Shapira, A. and Madsen, M. C. Cooperative and competitive behavior of kibbutz and urban

children in Israel. Child Development, 1969, 40, 609-617.

Shure, G H. and Meeker, R. J. Empirical demonstration of normative behavior in the

Prisoner’s Dilemma. Proceedings of the 76th Annual Convention, American Psychological

Association, 1968, 61-62.

Shure, G. H. and Meeker, R. J. Bargaining processes in experimental territorial conflict

situations. Peace Research Society: Papers, 1969, 11, 109-122.

Siegel, S. Level of aspiration and decision making. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 253-262.

Steiner, I. D. Group process and productivity. New York: Academic, 1972.

Swinth, R. L. The establishment of the trust relationship. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1967,

Terhune, K. W. The effects of personality in cooperation and conflict. In P. Swingle (Ed.),

The structure of conflict. New York: Academic, 1970. Pp. 193-234.

Thibaut, J. W. The development of contractual norms in bargaining: Replication and

variation. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1968, 12, 102-112.

Thibaut, J. W. and Faucheux, C. The development of contractual norms in a bargaining

situation under two types of stress. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1965. 1,

Thibaut, J. W. and Kelley, H. H. The social psychology of groups. New York: Wiley, 1959.

Thibaut, J. W. and Ross, M. Commitment and experience as determinants of assimilation

and contrast. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1969, 13, 322-329.

Thibaut, J. W. and Walker, L. Procedural justice: A psychological analysis. Hillsdale, N. J.:

Erlbaum Associates, 1975.

Thorngate, W. Person perception and the prediction of behavior in decomposed games.

Technical Report 73-2, Social Psychology Labs, University of Alberta, Edmonton,

Canada. (Undated.)

Tolstoy, L. The Kreutzer sonata and other tales. Oxford: World’s Classics, Oxford University

Press, 1940.

Triandis, H. C., Vassiliou, V., and Nassiakou, M. Three cross-cultural studies of subjective

culture. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Monograph Supplement, 1968, 8, No. 4,

Part 2.

Trivers, R. L. Parent-offspring conflict. American Zoologist, 1974, 14, 249-264.

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 1973, 5, 207-232.

INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS

Vinacke, W. E. and Arkoff, A. An experimental study of coalitions in the triad. American

Sociological Review, 1957, 22, 406-414.

Waller, W. W. and Hill, R. The family, a dynamic interpretation. New York: Dryden, 1951.

Wilson, K. V. and Bixenstine, V. E. Forms of social control in two-person, two-choice

games. Behavioral Science, 1962, 7, 92-102.

Winch, R. F. The modern family. New York: Holt, 1952.

Wish, M., Deutsch, M., and Kaplan, S. J. Perceived dimensions of interpersonal relations.

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1976, 33, 409-420.

Wolf, G. Evaluation within interpersonal systems. General Systems, 1972, 17, 43-51.

Wrightsman, L. S. Personality and attitudinal correlates of trusting and trustworthy

behaviors in a two-person game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1966, 4,

Wyer, R. S. Prediction of behavior in two-person games. Journal of Personality and Social

Psychology, 1969, 13, 222-238.

Author Index

Alexander, C. N., 193

Arkoff, A., 200

Arnold, S. E., 15

Aronfreed, J., 194-195

Aronson, E., 234

Asprea, A., 186

Bandura, A., 175

Barker, R. G., 323

Benton, A. A., 235

Bergmann, I., 316

Bixenstine, V. E., 50

Blau, T., v

Bonacich, P., 187-188

Braithwaite, R. B., 57, 61

Brehm, J. W., 236

Brown, B., 190-191

Brown, J. S., 324

Butler, D., 326

Cairns, H., 211n

Caporicci, E., 186

Cartwright, D., 321

Chadwick-Jones, J. K., 321

Christie, R., 200-202

Cole, A. H., 236

Daniels, F. V., 198-199

Davis, K. E., 214

deMajo, G., 186

Deutsch, M., 59, 107-108, 190, 196, 198,

Doob, A. N., 189

Drews, J. L., 220

Epstein, Y., 198

Evans, G., 198

Farber, I. E., 324

Faucheux, C., 96, 172, 188, 196, 200, 220

Festinger, L., 205, 324

Foa, E. B., 57, 64

Foa, U. G., 57, 64

rence

ebeoe!

Friedland, N., 15

Fua, G., 186

Gallo, P. J. Jr., 198

Geis, F. L., 200-202

Gerard, H. B., 22, 205

Gergen, K. J., 189

Goethals, G. R., 232

Gouldner, A. W., 203

Gruder, C. L., 189

Gumpert, P., 198

Guyer, M., 36, 78-81, 83, 86, 92, 96, 133

Hamburger, H., 45, 268, 270

Hamilton, E., 211n

Hamilton, W. D., 180

Harary, F., 321

Heider, F., 277

Hill, R., 72

Holmes, J. G., 238

Homans, G. C., v, 204

Horvitz, J. E., 219

Howard, N., 155

Hurst, P. M., 198

Iacono, G., 186

Jaffe, D., 222

Jones, E. E., 22, 205, 210, 214, 228, 232

Kahneman, D., 227

Kaplan, S. J., 107, 108

Kelley, H. H., v, 5, 9, 31, 40, 58, 70,

Krauss, R. M., 190, 198, 237, 324

Kuhlman, D. M., 203

Lanzetta, J. T., 196, 200, 220

Leeper, R. W., 322, 323

Lewin, K., 28, 204, 214, 217, 315, 321-325

Lewis, S. A., 287

Liebling, B., 235

Linder, D., 234

Luce, R. D., 162

McClintock, C. G., 15, 140, 181-182, 184,

DoD 2228

McNeel, S. P., 15, 185, 186, 198

Maderna, A., 186

Madsen, M. C., 191, 192, 196

Marlowe, D., 189

Marshello, A. F. J., 203

Marwell, G., 186

Meeker, R. J., 166, 220

Mehrabian, A., 211

Messick, D. M., 15, 185, 220, 221, 226

Miller, D. T., 238

Mischel, W., 205-206

Montague, A., 180

Morgan, W. R., 190

Moscovici, S., 196, 200, 220

Mundy, D., 217

Nassiakou, M., 211

Nisbett, R. E., 210

Norman, R. Z., 321

Nuttin, J. M. Jr., 196, 200, 220

Oliver, E., 222

Orvis, B. R., 326

Osgood, C. E., 196, 233

Oskamp, S., 193, 235

AUTHOR INDEX

Paskal, V., 194-195

Patterson, T., 226-227

Pepitone, A., 186

Perfetto, M., 186

Pilisuk, M., 233

Plato, 211n

Pruitt, D. G., 42-46, 193, 199, 220, 233,

Rabbie, J. M., 196, 200, 220

Radloff, R., 217

Radlow, R., 198

Raiffa, H., 162

Rapoport, A., 36, 78-81, 83, 86, 92, 96,

Ratcliff, K., 186

Ross, M., 227, 232

Sawyer, J., 190

Schelling, T. C., 172

Schenitzki, D., 287

Schmitt, D. R., 186

Schopler, J., 236

Shapira, A., 191, 192

Shure, G. H., 166, 196, 200, 220

Siegel, S., 149

Skolnick, P., 233

Stahelski, A. J., 225-226, 237

Steiner, I. D., 108

Suci, G. J., 196

Swinth, R. L., 232, 233

Tannenbaum, P. H., 196

Terhune, K. W., 200

Thibaut, J. W.,

V, 5, 9, 15, 31, 40,

Thompson, V., 236

Thorngate, W., 15, 185, 223-224

Tiberi, E., 186

Tolstoy, L., 5-13

Tonucci, F., 186

Triandis, H. C., 211

Trivers, R. L., 180

Turner, R., 179

AUTHOR INDEX

Tversky, A., 227

Vassiliou, V., 211

Villone, G., 186

Vinacke, W. E., 200

Walker, L., 243

Waller, W. W., 72

Weidner, M. F., 198

Weil, H. G., 193

Wilson, K. V., 50

Winch, R. F., 234

Wish, M., 107, 108

Wolf, G., 50

Wortman, C., 228

Wrightsman, L. S., 198

Wyer, R. S., 50

\yrgs

Hh,

ee)

S's Ae :

neath

ig. Aetiieae’ a

4b cOL.

SE.

wl.

2 Ait

Alwi

~checsuas

Ww.

Siow

OW thet oe

wisi

im rida: i.

; jl

ee,

‘=.

“Se

ns.

Ua a

os ? 5

.'a5

» Sa,

Eee!

- > PAWS?» Te we)

Ors —

oastythet. #4

Subject Index

Altruism, 15, 174, 222-224, 254

Antisocial transformations, 22, 176-178

Bargaining games, 175, 281-312

“Battle of the Sexes,” game of, 87-91

decomposed, 45-46

optimal patterns, 129-136

Behavior control (BC):

defined, 31

illustrated, 11

Bilateral reflexive control (BRC):

antecedents of, 56

defined, 31-32, 109

“Chicken,” game of, 40-42, 87-91, 134compounded, 271-272

Circular dependence in the triad, 258Coalition formation, 301-312

Cognitive balance, and outcome correspondence in triad, 275-278

Commonality of interest, see Outcome

correspondence

Comparison level (CL), 8-9, 70-71, 148for alternatives (CL alt), 8-9, 40, 71-73

Competitive orientation, 144-145, 184Complementarity, and similarity, 66-67

Compliance pairs, 286-288

Components of interdependence, 31-52

antecedents of components in given

matrix, 56-59

Compound games, 268-271

Concordance of components, 34-38

antecedents of, 62-70

Conflict of interest, see Outcome noncorrespondence

Conjunctive pattern, 58-59, 100-101,

Constant-sum relationship, 94, 160-162

Cooperative joint action, 283

Correspondence of outcomes, see Outcome correspondence

Correspondent inferences, theory of, 214

Costs, defined and illustrated, 8-9

Decomposition of matrix, 42-46, 199Dependence, 9-10

index of, 114-117

mutuality of, 81

Differential control over outcomes, 127

Discordance of. components, 34-38

antecedents of, 62-70

Disjunctive pattern, 58-59, 100-101, 109,

Double transpositions, 154-155

Effective matrix, 14-23, 77, 81, 106, 141,

and repeated play, 155-159

Equity and equality, 293-296

Escalation of conflict, 229-230, 237-239

Exchange versus coordination, 104, 318

Fate control (FC):

defined, 31

illustrated, 10-12

perception of, 215-219

Frontier pairs, 287-288

“Frontier” values, 121-125, 156-159,

Given matrix, 16-23, 55-73, 77, 81, 106,

and repeated play, 163-166, 214-220

Grand mean (GM), 39-42, 70-73

“Hero,” game of, 92-93

compounded, 271-272

Imposed joint action, 283

Indebtedness to Lewin, 321-325

Independent action, 283

Independent Action pair (IA), 284

triplets, 302

Interdependence matrix, 1-23

illustrated from fiction, 5-13

limitations, 316-317

Joint control over outcomes, 127

Justice, 128-129, 145-146, 262, 292-301

Kinesics, 21]

“Martyr,” game of, 92

Mathematical versus psychological

analysis, 46-49

Matrix, see Interdependence matrix

Maximizing Differences Game (MDG),

Maximum joint payoff (MJP), 90-91,

Metagame theory, 155

Mixed-motive relationships, 19, 176,

Mixed strategy, 161-162

Mutual behavior control (MBC):

antecedents of, 57-62

defined, 31-32, 109

illustrated, 11-13

Mutual fate control (MFC):

antecedents of, 56-57

defined, 31-32, 109

illustrated, 11-12

SUBJECT INDEX

Mutual trust, development of, 231-237

Negotiation, 292-301

Outcome, defined and illustrated, 8-10

Outcome correspondence, 11-13, 33-35,

antecedents of, 59-70

and cognitive balance in the triad,

effects of components on, 120-121

and “‘frontier’”’ values, 121-125

index of, 117-125

influenced by third party, 255-258

perception of, 213, 216

Outcome matrix, see Interdependence

matrix

Outcome noncorrespondence, 12-13,

Outcome transformation, 139-150

Paralanguage, 211

Power, see Behavior control; Fate

control

Pre-emption, 134-136, 151-155, 176, 225

Principle of contemporaneity, 322-323

Prisoner’s Dilemma Game (PDG), 93analyzed into components, 46-49

compounded, 268-269

decomposed, 42-45, 199-200

double transposition, 154-155

expanded, 238

optimal pattern, 129-134

and social exchange, 63, 68

third-party influence on, 252-253

Prosocial transformations, 22, 171-176

Prosocial versus egoistic transformations, 178-181

Randomized strategy, 161-162

Ranked-outcome (RO) matrices, 86-87

Reflexive control (RC):

defined, 31

perception of, 215-219

Response facilitation, 57-62

SUBJECT INDEX

Response interference, 57-62

Rewards, defined and illustrated, 8-10

Self-regulation and transformations,

Separable games, 45

Sequential transformation, 140,

Shared control over outcomes, 127

Similarity and complementarity, 66-67

“Social exchange,” v, 63, 68, 107-108,

exchange versus coordination, 107,

Symmetric components, 79, 87-102

Taxonomy of situations, 323

Threat game, 36-38, 94, 96, 101-103

Threat pair (Th), 284-285, 288-289

triplets, 302-307

Tit-for-tat, 156-160

Transformation of given matrix, 17-24,

perception of, 220-229

Transpositional transformation, 139Triplets, 302-312

and frontier, 306-307

‘“Turn-taking”’ patterns, 60-61, 101-102,

Two-outcome-level (TOL) matrices,

Unilateral control over outcomes, 127

Zero-sum relationship, 94, 161-162

A tall

in E

ivf y

| Aee| want

wie cade py >

he?

cial,

Hite MES oan

sinclyngsn

w n

ike eal

fev on

é

Le bd

Wihehytef.

opine Be

rh:

peta

“eae vate

is hae eine

my, <

, rei oY

ot, Seca

et eae rit! édhudves ea 4

is) Sas

if 7

%, 7. A

1h}

ties

‘hatter eesgr

‘(a

qurag

Sy had a

About the authors

HAROLD H. KELLEY is Professor of

Psychology at the University of California, Los Angeles. He received his Ph.D.

degree in group psychology at the

Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

and has taught group dynamics at the

University of Michigan and psychology

at Yale University and the University of

Minnesota.

Dr.

Kelley

been

President of the Division of Personality

and Social Psychology in the American

Psychological

Association,

President of the Western Psychological

Association. The recipient of the Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award

from the American Psychological AssoCiation in 1971, he is also a Fellow of the

American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Dr. Kelley is coauthor with Dr.

Thibaut of THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF GROUPS (Wiley, 1959), and

coauthor of ATTRIBUTION: PERCEIVING THE CAUSES OF BEHAVIOR.

JOHN W. THIBAUT is Alumni Distinguished Professor of Psychology at the

University of North Carolina at Chapel

Hill. He received his A.B. degree in psychology from the University of North

Carolina and his Ph.D. degree in psychology from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Dr. Thibaut has

been Assistant Professor of Psychology

at Boston University, a Lecturer and Research Associate at Harvard University,

and Professor of Psychology and

Chairman of the Psychology Department at the University of North Carolina.

He is the coauthor of PROCEDURAL

JUSTICE, coeditor of CONTEMPORARY TOPICS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY, and was the founding editor of

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. Dr. Thibaut has been a Fellow

at the

Center for Advanced Study in the

Behavioral Sciences in Palo Alto, and a

Special U.S.P.H.S. Fellow .at the Sorbonne, Paris.

Titles of related interest —

THE MENTAL HEALTH INDUSTRY

A Cultural Phenomenon

Peter A. Magaro, Robert Gripp, & David J. McDowell

This volume places the treatment of mental illness within its cultural context to

illustrate how concepts of pathology arise more out of cultural beliefs than from any

scientific fact. Through a well-researched review of therapy results, it shows that

there is no evidence for the effectiveness of current treatment systems and examines why such research has not been performed. The book addresses the underlying issues which prevent treatment evaluation ... presents the methodological

obstacles to evaluation ... offers a design for measuring the relevant variables

involved in assessment ... and suggests modifications on the current treatment

system.

GIFT OF LIFE

The Social and Psychological Impact of Organ Transplantation

Roberta G. Simmons, Susan D. Klein, & Richard L. Simmons

Analyzing one of the most dramatic of the new medical technologies — organ

transplantation — this book covers those aspects that have general implications

for public policy and sociological theory, and describes the social-psychological

impact of kidney transplantation itself. As part of its focus, it examines the impact

on the recipient's and donor’s self-images, and analyzes how individuals and

families make decisions under stress. The final discussion concerns the health

care delivery issues and the questions of funding created by the rapid rise of this

new technology.

THE ALIEN DOCTORS

Foreign Medical Graduates in American Hospitals

Rosemary Stevens, Louis Wolf Goodman, & Stephen S. Mick

This original contribution to the sociology of occupations, the professions, and

medicine documents the characteristics and experiences of a representative sample of physicians from all over the world who have come to this country for advanced training. Drawing upon results of the first study in this field based on a

nation-wide sample,

the authors examine

both the role of foreign. medical

graduates as manpower in the United States and their individual motivation for

migration. An underlying theory of professional migration is developed. Also explored are such provocative issues as the exploitation of foreign medical graduates

in United States hospitals, whether foreign medical graduates are fulfilling roles

which are not expected of American physicians, and the impact of United States

immigration policy.

WILEY-INTERSCIENCE

a division of JOHN WILEY & SONS

605 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016

New York @ Chichester e Brisbane e Toronto

‘he

